BioGRID ORCS dossier — Gm3558: source-publication FULL TEXT (PMC open access)
Generated 2026-07-16 03:23 UTC. Non-open-access articles show abstract only in the main dossier.
================================================================================

### PMID 29290584 — CRISPR Screens Uncover Genes that Regulate Target Cell Sensitivity to the Morphogen Sonic Hedgehog.
Developmental cell (2018) · https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29290584/

CRISPR Screens Uncover Genes that Regulate Target Cell Sensitivity to the Morphogen Sonic Hedgehog
Summary
To uncover regulatory mechanisms in Hedgehog (Hh) signaling, we conducted genome-wide screens to identify positive and negative pathway components and validated top hits using multiple signaling and differentiation assays in two different cell types. Most positive regulators identified in our screens, including Rab34, Pdcl, and Tubd1, were involved in ciliary functions, confirming the central role for primary cilia in Hh signaling. Negative regulators identified included Megf8, Mgrn1, and an unannotated gene encoding a tetraspan protein we named Atthog. The function of these negative regulators converged on Smoothened (SMO), an oncoprotein that transduces the Hh signal across the membrane. In the absence of Atthog, SMO was stabilized at the cell surface and concentrated in the ciliary membrane, boosting cell sensitivity to the ligand Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) and consequently altering SHH-guided neural cell-fate decisions. Thus, we uncovered genes that modify the interpretation of morphogen signals by regulating protein-trafficking events in target cells.
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
CRISPR screens identify positive and negative regulators of Hedgehog signaling
Screens identified known and new genes linked to cilia and ciliopathies
Atthog, Megf8, and Mgrn1 attenuate target cell responses to Hedgehog signals
Attenuators of signaling promote the endocytosis and degradation of Smoothened
Pusapati et al. use CRISPR-based screens in mammalian cells to identify genes that modify cellular responses to Hedgehog morphogens. The screens provide a comprehensive view of the regulatory structure of Hedgehog signaling, highlight its intimate connection to primary cilia and ciliopathies, and uncover a role for Smoothened trafficking in regulating signaling strength.
Introduction
The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is a system for cell-cell communication that coordinates multiple processes during animal development. A hallmark of Hh ligands is their function as morphogens, secreted factors that pattern tissues as diverse as the Drosophila wing disc and the vertebrate spinal cord. The mechanism by which Hh ligands inscribe a pattern on a population of precursor cells is based on their ability to guide the adoption of distinct cell fates in response to different levels of signaling. For example, in the vertebrate neural tube, a temporal and spatial gradient of the ligand Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) drives the patterning of spinal neural progenitor subtypes along the dorsal-ventral axis.
Genetics has played a central role in the discovery and mechanistic understanding of Hh signaling. Both the identities and regulatory relationships between many of the protein components in the Hh pathway were elucidated initially through genetic analyses in Drosophila. Two decades later, forward genetic screens in the mouse led to the surprising discovery that vertebrate (but not Drosophila) Hh signaling depends on primary cilia, solitary membrane-enveloped projections present on the surfaces of most cells. These specialized organelles function as signaling centers during development in many tissues, demonstrated by the discovery of an ever-expanding class of human genetic disorders called ciliopathies. Many of the phenotypes seen in patients with ciliopathies are consistent with abnormalities in Hh signaling. Thus, genetic screens performed in different systems and under a variety of conditions can uncover unexpected layers of regulation in signaling pathways.
Recent methodological advances using CRISPR/Cas9-based methods or haploid human cells have facilitated the application of genome-wide, loss-of-function screens to probe signaling pathways in cultured cells. We systematically screened for positive, negative, and attenuating regulators of Hh signal reception using a fluorescence-based transcriptional reporter for phenotypic enrichment. In a set of four genome-wide screens, we identified most of the core, non-redundant components of vertebrate Hh signaling. Consistent with the body of work from human and mouse genetics, these screens confirmed the importance of cilia in Hh signaling, detecting ∼20% of known cilia genes and ∼30% of known ciliopathy genes as having a significant effect on Hh signaling. Our screens for negative and attenuating regulators uncovered a role for membrane trafficking events in modifying target cell responses to Hh ligands. Loss-of-function mutations in three of the principal hits sensitized cultured fibroblasts and neural progenitor cells to SHH, shifting the SHH dose-response curve and altering the relationship between the concentration of SHH and target cell fate. The combined results of these screens provide a comprehensive view of the regulatory structure of Hh signaling and its intimate connection to primary cilia and ciliopathies.
Results
Genetic Screens in Mouse Fibroblasts to Identify Regulators of the Hh Pathway
We constructed and characterized a clonal NIH/3T3 cell line, hereafter called NIH/3T3-CG, that expressed (1) Cas9 and (2) GFP driven by a Hh-responsive promoter element containing eight binding sites for the GLI family of Hh transcription factors (GLI-GFP reporter) (Figure S1A). GFP fluorescence in NIH/3T3-CG cells increased in response to SHH in a dose-dependent, saturable fashion (Figure S1B). For the screens and the follow-up experiments described in this study, we left cells untreated (hereafter labeled “NoSHH”), exposed them to a low, sub-saturating concentration of SHH (“LoSHH”) that increased reporter activity to <10% of maximum, or exposed them to a high, near-saturating concentration of SHH (“HiSHH”) that increased reporter activity to >95% of maximum (Figure S1B). Compared with non-targeting controls, single guide RNAs (sgRNAs) targeting the positive regulators Smoothened (Smo) and G-protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (Adbrk1 or Grk2) reduced SHH-induced GFP fluorescence and sgRNAs targeting the negative regulators Patched 1 (Ptch1) and Suppressor of Fused (Sufu) induced a SHH-independent increase in GFP fluorescence (Figure S1C). These results show that GFP fluorescence in NIH/3T3-CG cells provided a quantitative readout of Hh signaling with a dynamic range that was sensitive to the perturbation of both positive and negative regulators and consequently could be used for a genome-wide pooled screen based on cell sorting.
CRISPR-Based Screens to Identify Genes that Influence Hh Signaling
(A) The screening strategy used to identify positive regulators, negative regulators, and attenuators of Hh signaling (see text for details). Bot, bottom.
(B–E) Volcano plots from the four screens. For each gene, the x axis shows its enrichment or depletion, calculated as the mean of all four sgRNAs targeting the gene, in the sorted population relative to the corresponding unsorted population, and the y axis shows statistical significance as measured by the false discovery rate (FDR)-corrected p value. The horizontal dashed line represents a p value threshold of 0.1. Positive and negative Hh pathway regulators are labeled as large teal and magenta dots, respectively; cilia genes as medium blue dots; all other genes as small gray dots. See also Figure S1 and Table S1.
We conducted four genome-wide screens in NIH/3T3-CG cells, each in duplicate, for a total of eight independent screens using the lentivirus-based Brie library (Figure 1A). In the screen for positive regulators (hereafter referred to as the “HiSHH_Bot10%” screen), we treated NIH/3T3-CG cells with HiSHH and then isolated ∼2 million with the lowest 10% of GFP fluorescence by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) (Figure 1B). In the three screens for negative regulators and attenuators, we isolated ∼1 million cells with the highest 5% of GFP fluorescence after treatment with HiSHH (the “HiSHH_Top5%” screen), LoSHH (the “LowSHH_Top5%” screen), or NoSHH (the “NoSHH_Top5%” screen) (Figures 1C–1E). For each screen, sgRNA enrichment and depletion in the selected population was compared with the corresponding unsorted control population across two independent replicates using the MAGeCK algorithm.
Screens Identified Most Known Regulators of Hh Signaling and Many Genes Linked to Cilia and Ciliopathies
The results of the screens were visualized using volcano plots (Figures 1B–1E; complete tabulated results provided in Table S1). The asymmetric nature of the plots showed that the statistical power to detect depletion in the sorted population was lower than the power to detect enrichment. Hence, all further analyses only considered genes that were significant based on their false discovery rate (FDR)-corrected p values for enrichment in the sorted population.
Statistically Significant Screen Hits Are Enriched in Known Hh and Cilia Genes
(A) Depiction of core (rectangle) and accessory (oval) Hh pathway components, colored according to the FDR-corrected p value for their enrichment in the selected cell populations.
(B) Results of enrichment analysis showing the most significant associations between hits from all screens (with an FDR-corrected p value <0.1) in the Jensen database of disease-gene associations.
(C) Fractional enrichment of known Hh, cilia, and ciliopathy genes in all screens.
(D) Cumulative distribution function of HiSHH_Bot10% screen ranks for 123 Hh genes, 407 cilia genes, 176 ciliopathy genes, and two control gene lists (237 MAPK genes from the KEGG database and a random set of 300 genes). Statistical significance was calculated based on the top 2,000 genes using the hypergeometric test. See also Table S2.
Taken together, the screens identified a majority of the components at all levels of Hh signaling from the cell surface to the nucleus (see Figure 2A for a comprehensive summary and Table S2 for a manually curated list of Hh genes). A top hit in all three negative regulator screens was the main receptor for SHH, PTCH1 (Figures 1C–1E). In the absence of Hh ligands, PTCH1 blocks the activity of the G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR)-family protein SMO, which transmits the Hh signal across the membrane. As expected, SMO was a top hit in the positive regulator screen, along with genes encoding several proteins that have been previously implicated in SMO signaling, including GRK2 and the SMO-interacting proteins EVC, IQCE, and LZTFL1 (Figures 1B and 2A).
SMO antagonizes the effects of two major cytoplasmic negative regulators: Suppressor of Fused (SUFU) and Protein Kinase A (PKA) (Figure 2A). SUFU and PKA promote the proteolytic conversion of GLI3 into a transcriptional repressor (GLI3R) and also block the formation of the transcriptional activators GLI2A and GLI3A. SUFU was a top hit in all negative regulator screens (Figures 1C–1E). PKA was not identified, likely because its catalytic subunit can be encoded by two redundant genes (Prkaca and Prkacb). However, several proteins that regulate PKA activity and have previously been implicated in Hh signaling were prominent screen hits (Figure 2A). Two proteins that increase PKA activity and so function as negative regulators of Hh signaling, adenylate cyclase (ADCY6) and its activating heterotrimeric G-protein subunit GαS (the product of Gnas gene), were identified in the negative regulator screens. Conversely, Gαi3 (the product of Gnai3 gene), a heterotrimeric G-protein subunit that inhibits adenylate cyclases and reduces PKA activity, was identified as a positive regulator (Figure 2A). GPR161, a GαS -coupled negative regulator of Hh signaling, was not targeted by the Brie library, but TULP3 and GRK2, implicated as positive and negative regulators of GPR161 function respectively, were identified in screens for attenuating regulators (LoSHH_Top5%) and positive regulators (HiSHH_Bot10%), respectively.
At the level of the Hh-responsive transcription factors (TFs), our screens for negative regulators identified proteins (GSK3β, FBWX11, KIF7, and RAB23) that promote the biogenesis of GLI3R and proteins (MED12 and BCOR) that promote the transcriptional repression of Hh target genes (Figure 2A). Conversely, the HiSHH_Bot10% screen for positive regulators identified components (DYRK1A, BRD2, and PRMT1) that promote activation of Hh target genes (Figure 2A). Taken together, these results demonstrated that our screening strategy based on cell sorting could identify many non-redundant positive, negative, and attenuating regulators of Hh signaling.
To provide a more unbiased view of the functional classes of genes identified by our screens, we performed gene set analyses on the 641 genes across all four screens that were enriched in the sorted populations with an FDR-corrected p value <0.1 (Table S1). With this list as the input, Gene Ontology (GO) analysis identified “cilium morphogenesis” as the most enriched term (FDR-corrected p value ∼10−19). Strikingly, nearly all of the top disease associations found in this gene list were known ciliopathies or congenital anomalies associated with defects in cilia or Hh signaling (Figure 2B).
To evaluate the enrichment of cilia-related genes among our screen hits, we used three benchmark gene lists. The first was a manually curated list of 176 genes (hereafter referred to as the “Hh genes” list shown in Table S2), which included all genes linked to a Hh-related signaling defect or phenotype in the PubMed database. A large number of these Hh genes were cilia-related genes, since even subtle defects in cilia structure or function can impair Hh signal transduction. We also compared the list of screen hits with two recently published lists of (1) all known ciliary genes (n = 426) and (2) all known ciliopathy genes (n = 186) that build on the gold-standard SYSCILIA compendium. Taken together, the four screens identified 40% of Hh genes, 20% of all cilia genes, and 30% of all ciliopathy genes as significant hits (Figure 2C). Most of the cilia-related genes were identified in the HiSHH_Bot10% screen for positive regulators or the NoSHH_Top5% screen (Figures 1B and 1E). Cilia genes were hits in the NoSHH_Top5% screen because ciliary defects prevent the formation of GLI3R and thus lead to the transcriptional de-repression of some Hh target genes. A cumulative distribution function plot showed that the top 2,000 hits from the HiSHH_Bot10% screen were highly enriched for cilia- and ciliopathy-related genes from each of these three benchmark lists (Figure 2D). Since cilia are essential for the transduction of high-level Hh signals, very few ciliary genes emerged as hits in the HiSHH_Top5% and LoSHH_Top5% screens (Figures 1C and 1D).
Our results are consistent with studies from mouse and human genetics that indicate the close and complex relationship between Hh signaling and primary cilia at multiple levels of the pathway. Over the past decade, these studies have found that the Hh pathway is exquisitely sensitive to even subtle changes in cilia structure or function. Conversely, abnormalities in Hh signaling, read-out through phenotypes in mice or humans, have served as sensitive indicators of ciliary defects. CRISPR-based screens in cultured cells using fluorescent transcriptional reporters to select for cells with altered levels of Hh signaling can provide an orthogonal strategy for the functional identification of ciliary genes.
Validation of Candidate Genes in Two Different Cell Types
We used a multi-step strategy (summarized in Figure S2A) to select genes likely to have the strongest and most general effects on Hh signaling from the list of top-ranked hits from all four screens. Of the 69 genes that were tested in pooled cell lines during phase I of our validation strategy, genes targeted by at least one high-quality guide that mapped to a unique position in the mouse genome and either (1) decreased GFP fluorescence by ≥ 2-fold (for positive regulators) or (2) increased GFP fluorescence by ≥ 1.5-fold (for negative regulators) were selected for phase II of analysis (Figure S2). The five genes that encoded putative positive regulators were Cep350, Pdcl, Rab34, Fkbp10, and Tubd1 (Figure S2B). Candidate negative regulators included two genes linked to heterotaxy and congenital heart defects (Mgrn1 and Megf8), two genes linked to hereditary cavernous malformations (Ccm2 and Pdcd10), Mesdc1, and an unstudied open reading frame annotated as BC030336 in mouse and C16orf52 in humans (Figures S2C–S2E). We named this gene Atthog for Attenuator of Hedgehog.
Clonal Lines Carrying Deletions in Top Hits Identify Regulators of Hh Signaling
(A and B) Hh signaling strength was assessed in clonal, mutant NIH/3T3 cells by measuring Gli1 mRNA by qRT-PCR after LoSHH or HiSHH treatment.
(C and D) Hh signaling was assessed in clonal, mutant NPCs exposed to LoSHH or HiSHH using either a fluorescent reporter of target gene induction (GLI-Venus), (C) or a fluorescent reporter of motor neuron differentiation (OLIG2-mKate), (D). Bars represent the mean Gli1 mRNA level (A and B) or mean reporter fluorescence (C and D) from 2 to 3 independent clonal lines. Each data point, derived from a separate clonal cell line, represents either the mean Gli1 mRNA level from two technical replicates (A and B) or the median reporter fluorescence (10,000 cells) from two independent experiments (C and D). See also Figure S2 and Table S3.
For each of these 11 genes, we generated 2–3 independent clonal NIH/3T3 cell lines with loss-of-function mutations. To exclude off-target effects of genome editing, we used sgRNAs that were different from the Brie library guides used in the initial screens and the first phase of validation (sgRNA sequences, sites targeted by the sgRNAs within each gene, and gels showing successful editing are shown in Table S3). To exclude genes that only influenced the synthetic GLI-GFP reporter, we evaluated Hh signaling in these clonal cell lines by measuring the induction of Gli1, an endogenous direct Hh target gene commonly used to measure signaling strength. Among cell lines lacking the putative positive regulators, Rab34−/−, Tubd1−/−, and Pdcl1−/− NIH/3T3 cells showed the strongest defects in SHH-induced Gli1 expression (Figure 3A). Among cell lines lacking negative regulators, Atthog−/−, Megf8−/−, and Mgrn1−/− NIH/3T3 cells showed constitutive, SHH-independent induction of Gli1 (Figure 3B). Interestingly, exposure of cells to LoSHH, which barely increased Gli1 transcription in wild-type (WT) cells, produced maximal induction of Gli1 in mutant cell lines, showing that loss of these genes sensitized cells to SHH (Figure 3B).
Cultured spinal neural progenitor cells (NPCs) function as an excellent model system for studying Hh signaling. When NPCs are induced to differentiate, their adopted identity is a direct product of Hh signaling strength. To test if our top candidates modulated Hh signaling in this physiologically relevant cell system, we individually knocked out the ten genes in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs), differentiated these cells toward spinal NPCs, and then exposed them to varying SHH concentrations. To facilitate this analysis, we used a recently described mESC line stably carrying dual fluorescent Hh signaling reporters: a GLI-Venus synthetic transcriptional reporter, analogous to the GLI-GFP reporter used in NIH/3T3 cells, and an OLIG2-mKate reporter in which the far-red fluorescent protein mKate was fused to the C terminus of endogenous Olig2 via a self-cleaving peptide (https://doi.org/10.1101/104307). OLIG2-mKate fluorescence reports on the SHH-induced differentiation of mESCs into spinal motor neuron progenitors.
mESCs harboring this dual Hh signaling reporter system were differentiated into NPCs and FACS was used to simultaneously measure SHH-induced increases in Venus (Figure 3C) and mKate (Figure 3D) fluorescence. As in NIH/3T3 cells, loss-of-function mutations in Rab34, Pdcl, and Tubd1 led to the strongest decreases in signaling. The loss of Mgrn1, Atthog, and Megf8 function had minimal effects on the basal levels of Venus and mKate fluorescence (Figures 3C and 3D). However, these mutant NPCs were hyper-sensitive to SHH. Low concentrations of SHH, which increased Venus and mKate fluorescence in WT cells by less than 2-fold, produced a 4–5-fold increase in Mgrn1−/− cells and induced maximum reporter fluorescence in Atthog−/− and Megf8−/− cells. Hence, Mgrn1, Megf8, and Atthog are attenuating modifiers of Hh signaling in NPCs: their loss enhances the sensitivity of cells to SHH.
In summary, data from clonal derivatives of two distinct cell types using both target gene expression assays and differentiation assays identified six genes for further analysis: the positive regulators Rab34, Tubd1, and Pdcl, and the negative regulators Mgrn1, Megf8, and Atthog.
Positive Regulators of Hh Signaling Are Required for Primary Cilia Functions
Two assays were used to decipher how the six selected genes influenced Hh signaling. First, we used immunoblotting to measure protein levels of key Hh pathway components in clonal NIH/3T3 cell lines carrying loss-of-function mutations in each gene. GLI1 and PTCH1 are encoded by direct Hh target genes and so their abundance provides a transcriptional readout of signaling. GLI3R abundance provides a non-transcriptional readout for signaling, since its biogenesis is negatively regulated by Hh signals. Importantly, GLI3R levels in the absence of SHH report on the integrity of primary cilia: loss of cilia leads to a reduction in GLI3R and the consequent de-repression of some Hh target genes.
Ciliary Integrity Is Impaired in NIH/3T3 Cells Lacking TUBD1, RAB34, and PDCL
(A) Ciliary localization of Hh pathway components in the presence and absence of SHH.
(B) Immunoblots showing the abundance of Hh pathway proteins and a loading control (p38) in extracts of Rab34−/−, Tubd1−/−, or Pdcl−/− NIH/3T3 cells. Data from an independent set of cell lines are shown in Figure S3E.
(C, D, and G) Acetylated tubulin (acTub, red) immunostaining was used to visualize primary cilia and determine the frequency of ciliated cells in wild-type NIH/3T3 cells and two independent Tubd1−/− (C), Rab34−/− (D), or Pdcl−/− (G) clonal cell lines. DAPI (blue) marks nuclei.
(E and H) HiSHH-induced ciliary SMO (green) in Rab34−/− (E) and Pdcl−/− (H) cells. Arrowheads identify magnified cilia shown to the right of each panel.
(F and I) The distribution of SMO fluorescence intensity (n ∼100 cilia/condition) is shown on a violin plot (see STAR Methods).
Statistical significance was determined by the Kruskal-Wallis test; ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001. Scale bars, 10 μm in merged panels and 2 μm in zoomed displays. See also Figure S3.
Second, we measured the dynamic, SHH-regulated localization of endogenous Hh pathway components at primary cilia by immunofluorescence (IF). In the absence of SHH, PTCH1 is concentrated in and around the ciliary membrane. SHH binding to PTCH1 leads to its clearance from the cilium and cell surface, allowing SMO to accumulate in the ciliary membrane and adopt an active conformation. SMO activation is correlated with increased accumulation of GLI2/3 at the tips of cilia. Trafficking of the SUFU-GLI2/3 complex through cilia is required for the conversion of GLI2 and GLI3 into potent transcriptional activators. Thus, ciliary levels of PTCH1, SMO, and GLI2 can be used to evaluate the status of signal propagation at multiple levels in the pathway (Figure 4A).
We emphasize that all assays presented hereafter for the analysis of both positive and negative regulators were performed in two independent clonal cell lines for each genotype. In some cases, analysis of only one clonal cell line is shown in the main figure, with data from the second clonal cell line presented in a supplemental figure panel noted in the figure legend.
Tubd1 encodes δ-Tubulin, a divergent tubulin conserved across eukaryotes, whose presence in genomes is correlated with the presence of cilia (Figures S3A and S3B). Mutations in the Chlamydomonas ortholog of Tubd1, encoded by the UNI3 gene, cause defects in the assembly of flagella, which are analogous to vertebrate motile cilia. Centrioles in human cells lacking TUBD1 are unstable and fail to undergo maturation. GLI1 induction was abolished in Tubd1−/− NIH/3T3 cells (Figures 4B and S3E) because nearly 100% of these cells lacked primary cilia (Figure 4C).
RAB34 is a Golgi-associated small GTPase implicated in regulating the sub-cellular distribution of lysosomes. RAB34 is confined to metazoans, but it is related to the RAB8 proteins that are widely present across most eukaryotic lineages and involved in ciliogenesis (Figures S3A and S3C). Interestingly, the genomic region upstream of Rab34 has a functional binding site for GLI proteins and Rab34 was shown to be a Hh target gene in the mouse limb bud. The phenotypes of Rab34−/− mouse embryos, which include polydactyly and exencephaly, are suggestive of defects in Hh signaling and cilia. While SHH-induced GLI1 protein levels were significantly reduced in Rab34−/− cells, these cells could transduce low-level Hh signals: Gli3R levels declined when SHH was added (Figures 4B and S3E). Immunofluorescence studies revealed that Rab34−/− cells had a reduced frequency of primary cilia compared with WT cells, although the cilia that did form had normal lengths (Figures 4D and S3F). SHH-triggered SMO accumulation was impaired in the residual cilia of Rab34−/− cells (Figures 4E and 4F), suggesting a defect in ciliary trafficking. The partial phenotypes observed in Rab34−/− cells may be related to redundancy with the vertebrate-specific paralogs RAB36 or RAB34b (Figure S3C).
PDCL, a member of the phosducin-like family of proteins, contains an N-terminal α-helical domain and a C-terminal domain of the thioredoxin superfamily. PDCL positively regulates heterotrimeric G-protein signaling by functioning as a chaperone for the assembly of G-protein βγ dimers. In many systems, disruption of the Pdcl gene leads to a decline in Gβγ protein levels and failure of G-protein signaling. Phylogenetic analysis of the phosducin-like clade hints at a cilium-associated function for Pdcl, in addition to a role in heterotrimeric G-protein signaling (Figures S3A and S3D). SHH was unable to induce the expression of the direct target genes Gli1 or Ptch1 in Pdcl−/− cells, although it could induce a decrease in GLI3R, consistent with low-level Hh signaling (Figures 4B and S3E). The frequency of primary cilia was modestly reduced in Pdcl−/− cells, without significant change in ciliary length (Figures 4G and S3F). However, there was a severe defect in SHH-induced accumulation of SMO in the ciliary membrane (Figures 4H and 4I). We note that PDCL could also influence Hh signaling by impairing the activity of heterotrimeric G proteins, such as the screen hit Gαi3 (Figure 1B), that antagonize PKA activity.
In conclusion, all three genes that emerged as the top hits among positive regulators of Hh signaling regulate ciliary functions. While further work will be required to elucidate the precise mechanisms, two of these genes, Rab34 and Pdcl, have never been linked to cilia. Their involvement suggests cilium-associated roles for Rab-regulated vesicle trafficking and heterotrimeric G-protein signaling. More generally, our analysis of positive regulators reaffirms the concept that genetic screens based on Hh signaling phenotypes can be used to discover genes that regulate the function of cilia.
Negative Regulators of Hh Signaling Suppress SMO Accumulation in Primary Cilia
We undertook a more in-depth analysis of the signaling attenuators Megf8, Mgrn1, and Atthog, because mutations that increase signaling activity are more likely to be in genes that encode (or directly regulate) core signaling components and less likely to cause non-specific or indirect effects.
Megf8 encodes a single-pass, type I transmembrane (TM) protein containing a short cytoplasmic tail and a large multi-domain extracellular region containing modules associated with cell adhesion (CUB and EGF domains) and binding to sugars (the β-propeller forming kelch repeats) (Figure S4A). It is conserved across metazoans and their closest sister group, the choanoflagellates, suggesting an origin pre-dating Hh signaling (Figure S3A). Mgrn1 (or Rnf156) is conserved throughout eukaryotes, regardless of the presence of Hh signaling or cilia, and encodes a ubiquitin E3-ligase containing a putative substrate-binding domain at the N terminus and a RING-finger domain (Figures S3A, S4B, and S4C).
ATTHOG, MEGF8, and MGRN1 Regulate Smoothened Signaling
(A) Immunoblots showing the abundance of Hh pathway proteins in extracts of Atthog−/−, Megf8−/−, and Mgrn1−/− cells. Data from an independent set of cell lines is shown in Figure S5B.
(B) Cell-surface biotinylation to assess levels of SMO and PTCH1 at the plasma membrane of indicated NIH/3T3 cell lines.
(C and D) Representative micrographs (C) and corresponding violin plots (D, n ∼ 100 cilia/condition) showing levels of endogenous SMO at primary cilia. Arrowheads point to selected cilia used for zoomed displays shown to the right of each panel. Statistical significance was determined by the Kruskal-Wallis test; ∗p < 0.05 and ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001. Data from an independent set of clonal cell lines are shown in Figure S5C.
(E and F) Basal (E) and LoSHH-induced Gli1 mRNA (F) in Atthog−/−, Megf8−/−, and Mgrn1−/− cell lines after treatment with vismodegib. The mean (bars) of three independent replicates (black dots) is shown with significance tested using the unpaired Student’s t test; ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001, ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001, ns, non-significant (p > 0.05).
Scale bars represent 10 μm in merged panels and 2 μm in zoomed displays. See also Figures S4–S6.
In contrast with positive regulators, the frequency of primary cilia was unaltered in cells carrying loss-of-function mutations in Megf8, Mgrn1, or Atthog (Figure S5A). Consistent with assays based on Gli1 mRNA levels (Figure 3B), measurement of GLI1, PTCH1, and GLI3R protein levels showed that Atthog−/− and Megf8−/− NIH/3T3 cells demonstrated partial signaling activity even in the absence of Hh ligands (Figures 5A and S5B). In addition, all three mutant cell lines were hyper-responsive to SHH, with LoSHH leading to full activation of signaling. Interestingly, SMO levels were significantly higher in Atthog−/− and Megf8−/− cells compared with WT or Mgrn1−/− cells. The increase in SMO protein in Atthog−/− and Megf8−/− cells was selectively observed in the population that has traversed the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (post-ER SMO) and thus migrates more slowly on an SDS-PAGE gel due to changes in glycosylation catalyzed by enzymes found in the Golgi (Figure 5A). Biotinylation experiments using a non-cell-permeable probe confirmed that cell-surface levels of SMO were markedly elevated in Atthog−/− and Megf8−/− cells but not in Mgrn1−/− cells (Figure 5B).
Visualization of the sub-cellular localization of SMO by confocal fluorescence microscopy revealed that it accumulated to very high levels in the ciliary membrane of Atthog−/− and Megf8−/− cells, even in the absence of SHH (Figures 5C, 5D, and S5C). The SMO in cilia could be detected in non-permeabilized cells by an antibody against the extracellular region of SMO, demonstrating that it was localized at the cell surface (Figure S5D). Ciliary SMO levels in Atthog−/− and Megf8−/− cells were much higher than WT cells treated with saturating SHH and even higher than Ptch1−/− cells, which show fully activated, ligand-independent signaling. Ciliary SMO levels in Mgrn1−/− cells were more variable but nonetheless significantly elevated compared with WT cells treated with saturating SHH, even though total SMO levels were unaffected by the loss of Mgrn1 (Figures 5C, 5D, and S5C).
The high levels of ciliary SMO in Atthog−/− and Megf8−/− made it difficult to assess whether SHH could further increase SMO in cilia, although images taken at low gain settings revealed responsiveness to HiSHH (Figures 5D and S5C). In Mgrn1−/− cells, SHH did clearly increase SMO accumulation in cilia. The lower baseline ciliary SMO levels in Mgrn1−/− cells correlated with the consistently lower degree of Hh signal potentiation seen in Mgrn1−/− cells compared with Atthog−/− and Megf8−/− cells (Figures 3B–3D). The function of Mgrn1 may be partially redundant with the vertebrate-specific paralog Rnf157, as proteins encoded by these genes display ∼50% identity (Figure S4B).
When SMO ciliary accumulation is accompanied by SMO activation, GLI2 protein levels at the tips of cilia increase, as seen when PTCH1 is inactivated by SHH or genetically disrupted in Ptch1−/− cells (Figures S5E and S5F). GLI2 levels were elevated at the tips of cilia in Atthog−/− and Megf8−/− cell lines and (even in the absence of SHH) were comparable with levels seen in activated WT cells or Ptch1−/− cells, supporting the presence of increased SMO activity (Figures S5E and S5F).
Taken together, data from target gene expression studies and ciliary protein localization studies demonstrated that the loss of Atthog, Megf8, and Mgrn1 led to both constitutive, SHH-independent signaling and potentiation of SHH-driven signaling. The striking increase in ciliary SMO pointed to an effect on SMO itself or a step upstream of SMO in the pathway. Activation of signaling downstream of SMO, for example by the loss of SUFU, does not cause the increased accumulation of SMO in primary cilia (Figures S6A and S6B). To conclusively address this point, we treated all three mutant cell lines with the direct SMO antagonist vismodegib. Vismodegib completely abolished signaling, both in the absence and the presence of SHH, proving that these negative regulators function at the level of SMO or a step upstream of SMO, such as SHH reception or PTCH1 function (Figures 5E, 5F, S6C, and S6D).
These negative regulators are unlikely to regulate ligand reception because signaling is increased in cell lines lacking these proteins even in the complete absence of SHH (Figure 3B). To address the issue of PTCH1 function, we assessed the sub-cellular localization of PTCH1 in Atthog−/−, Megf8−/−, and Mgrn1−/− cells and compared it with PTCH1 localization in cells lacking the downstream negative regulator SUFU (Sufu−/− cells). Increased signaling in all of these cell lines drives elevated levels of Ptch1 transcription and hence PTCH1 protein abundance (Figures 5A and S5B). As in WT and Sufu−/− cells, PTCH1 was localized in a punctate pattern in and around primary cilia in all three mutant cell lines in the absence of SHH (Figures S6E and S6F). Moreover, PTCH1 was cleared from cilia upon SHH addition, showing that SHH could still bind and downregulate PTCH1 normally in the absence of these genes (Figure S6F). Thus, increased SMO activity and SMO ciliary levels cannot be due to the faulty trafficking of PTCH1. Despite normal PTCH1 localization, PTCH1 inhibitory activity toward SMO could be compromised. This scenario is unlikely for two reasons. First, despite the high levels of SMO at cilia in Atthog−/− and Megf8−/− cells, they remained responsive to SHH, suggesting that PTCH1 is still able to partially restrain SMO activity (Figures 3B–3D). Second, SMO levels in cilia of Atthog−/− and Megf8−/− cells were considerably higher than in cilia of Ptch1−/− cells, implying that the loss of these genes must be performing a role other than just reducing PTCH1 activity (Figure 5D).
In summary, the three negative regulators that emerged as top hits in our screens converged on the same step in signaling, regulation of SMO ciliary localization or activity, suggesting that they may be involved in a common pathway.
ATTHOG Is a Tetraspan Protein that Regulates SMO Stability
ATTHOG Is Related to the Claudins and Suppresses SMO Levels at Primary Cilia
(A) Phylogenetic relationships of ATTHOG and its relatives within the tetraspan superfamily (see Figure S7A for an alignment). Families forming monophyletic clades are highlighted in distinct colors. The evolutionary provenance of each family is indicated below the gene name, with potential losses in nematodes indicated by a red cross. Families with cysteines predicted to be palmitoylated are marked (filled yellow circles). White circles with black outlines on the nodes denote a support of ≥0.9 using the Shimodaira-Hasegawa test on 1,000 resamples. The position of the computed ancestral sequence for rooting is shown with a red circle.
(B) Predicted topology of the four TM helices of ATTHOG. Highlighted features include the disulfide bridge in the extracellular domain (ECD), polar and charged residues in the TM bundle, and a cysteine in the cytoplasmic tail predicted to be palmitoylated. Clustering of hydrophilic residues within the TM bundle is highlighted with a yellow oval.
(C) Immunoblotting showing abundances of the indicated proteins in extracts of WT, Atthog−/−, and Atthog−/− cells stably re-expressing ATTHOG-1D4.
(D) Ciliary localization of SMO and ATTHOG in Atthog−/− NIH/3T3 cells transiently transfected with Atthog-1D4 (arrowhead). The imaging field shows one Atthog-1D4 transfected cell (green, its cilium identified with an arrowhead and marked by ARL13B) surrounded by untransfected cells. Ciliary SMO (red) is lost only in the Atthog-transfected cell.
(E) Violin plots showing the abundance of endogenous SMO at cilia of Atthog−/− (n = 100) and Atthog−/− cells transfected with Atthog-1D4 (n = 10).
(F and G) Representative micrographs (F) and corresponding violin plots (G, n = 100 cilia per condition) showing levels of endogenous SMO at primary cilia of Ptch1−/− and Atthog−/− cells left untreated or treated with vismodegib. Arrowheads point to selected cilia used for zoomed displays shown to the right of each panel. Statistical significance was determined by the Mann-Whitney test (E) or the Kruskal-Wallis test (G); ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001, ∗∗∗p < 0.001, ns, non-significant (p > 0.05).
Scale bars denote 10 μm in merged panels and 2 μm in zoomed displays.
We analyzed the function of Atthog in more detail. ATTHOG is an integral membrane protein that belongs to the large tetraspan superfamily. Based on phylogeny, we found ATTHOG to be nested within the radiation of a clade of tetraspans, which includes the claudin-like proteins, best known as components of inter-cellular tight junctions (Figure 6A). Therein ATTHOG is most closely related to three paralogous proteins, including one (TMHS) that has been implicated in human deafness as a key component of the mechanotransduction machinery of cochlear hair cells. Sequence alignments of Atthog orthologs (Figure S7A) predict that it has four transmembrane helices without a cleaved signal sequence, a disulfide-linked extracellular domain, and a conserved cysteine in the cytoplasmic tail that is predicted to be palmitoylated (Figure 6B). We also noted an unusual conservation of charged and polar residues in the TM helices that could form an aqueous channel that allows permeation of a hydrophilic solute or could mediate protein interactions within the plane of the membrane (Figure 6B).
The loss of ATTHOG led to an increase in the post-ER, cell-surface pool of SMO (Figure 5B). When Atthog−/− cells were rescued by the re-expression of Atthog, steady-state SMO levels were reduced to those seen in WT cells (Figure 6C) and SMO was cleared from primary cilia (Figures 6D and 6E). ATTHOG itself was localized to the ciliary membrane, plasma membrane, and Golgi (Figures 6D and S7B). In control experiments, the loss of ATTHOG did not alter levels of Frizzled receptors (Figure S7C), the closest relatives of SMO in the GPCR family, and did not change signaling responses to either WNT or BMP ligands in NIH/3T3 cells (Figures S7D and S7E).
ATTHOG could function by suppressing the accumulation of SMO at the cell surface or by suppressing the active conformation of SMO. Vismodegib, which shifts the SMO conformational equilibrium toward the inactive state, extinguished signaling in Atthog−/− cells (Figure 5E) but failed to reduce SMO levels at primary cilia (Figures 6F and 6G). In contrast, Vismodegib blocked both signaling and SMO ciliary accumulation in Ptch1−/− cells (Figures 6F and 6G). Thus, SMO accumulated in cilia of Atthog−/− cells regardless of whether it was in an active or inactive conformation, suggesting that ATTHOG primarily influences SMO trafficking rather than SMO activation.
ATTHOG Promotes the Internalization and Degradation of SMO at the Cell Surface
(A and B) After blocking new protein synthesis with cycloheximide, immunoblotting was used to measure the abundances of SMO, PTCH1, and p38 (a control) in WT and Atthog−/− cells. Levels of post-ER SMO and PTCH1 at various times after cycloheximide addition were plotted relative to their initial level (set to 1) in (B).
(C and D) Experimental scheme used to monitor the degradation of cell-surface SMO. The fraction of biotinylated SMO remaining at various times after cell-surface labeling is plotted in (D) and shown in Figure S7F.
(E and F) After labeling cell-surface SMO with a thiol-cleavable biotinylation reagent, internalization was monitored by measuring the amount of biotinylated SMO protected from the cell-impermeable reducing agent glutathione (GSH).
(G and H) After labeling live cells with a primary antibody against the extracellular domain of SMO, its levels at cilia were measured at various times after labeling by staining fixed, non-permeabilized cells with a cognate secondary antibody. The fraction of SMO remaining at primary cilia at various times after labeling is shown in (H). Each data point represents a mean ± SD derived from two independent experiments.
We next sought to understand how ATTHOG reduced the steady-state levels of SMO (Figure 6C). While the abundance of SMO mRNA was unaffected by the loss of ATTHOG (data not shown), the stability of post-ER SMO was markedly greater in Atthog−/− cells (t1/2 = 10 hr) compared with WT cells (t1/2 = 2 hr) (Figures 7A and 7B). In contrast, the half-life of PTCH1 was unchanged (even though the abundance of PTCH1 was higher due to increased transcription driven by constitutive signaling). These data show that ATTHOG likely promotes SMO degradation after its exit from the ER. The post-ER population includes SMO in the plasma membrane or in various intracellular membranes. To analyze the trafficking of SMO present at the cell surface, we selectively labeled this pool using a cell-impermeable biotinylation reagent (Figure 7C). The stability of cell-surface SMO was much greater in Atthog−/− cells (Figures 7D and S7F), likely because of a defect in SMO internalization (Figures 7E and 7F). We conclude that ATTHOG promotes the internalization and subsequent degradation of SMO present at the cell surface. The increased levels of SMO in the ciliary membrane of Atthog−/− cells (Figure 5C) are likely to be a consequence of an overall increase in plasma membrane SMO. A microscopy-based assay revealed that the turnover of ciliary SMO was much slower in Atthog−/− cells compared with WT cells (Figures 7G and 7H).
Loss of ATTHOG Modifies SHH-Guided Neural Patterning
ATTHOG Attenuates SHH-Induced Neural Differentiation Programs
(A) Progenitor domains within the embryonic spinal cord. NC, notochord; FP, floor plate; pMN, motor neuron progenitors; p0, p1, p2, and p3, ventral interneuron progenitors. A SHH gradient (purple circles) along the ventral to dorsal axis establishes progenitor domains that are each defined by the expression of a set of transcription factors (shown on the right).
(B) Distribution of Atthog mRNA (by in situ hybridization) in a transverse section of E11.5 mouse spinal cord tissue relative to the distribution (by IF) of the Hh-responsive transcription factor NKX6.1 (see A) and the neural progenitor marker SOX2.
(C) Immunoblots to assess the abundance of transcription factors that define progenitor identity after treatment of NPCs with LoSHH or HiSHH. Induction of NKX6.1, OLIG2, and NKX2.2 requires progressively higher doses of SHH, consistent with their expression at increasingly ventral positions in the neural tube; see (A).
(D and E) Activation of the GLI-Venus (D) or OLIG2-mKate (E) reporter in wild-type NPCs and two independent clonal Atthog−/− NPC lines treated with increasing concentrations of SHH. Each point represents the median fluorescence from ∼10,000 cells. A representative dose curve from three independent experiments is shown.
(F and G) Representative micrographs (F) and corresponding violin plots (G, n ∼ 100 cilia per condition) showing levels of endogenous SMO at cilia of WT and Atthog−/− NPCs. Scale bars, 100 μm in (B) or 10 μm in (F). Significance was determined by the Kruskal-Wallis test; ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001.
An intensively studied role of Hh signaling in vertebrates is in patterning of the developing spinal cord, where ventral neural identity is determined by a gradient of SHH secreted by the notochord and floor plate (Figure 8A). This morphogenetic activity of Hh ligands can be recapitulated in spinal cord NPCs. Compared with NIH/3T3 cells, NPCs afford a more physiological readout of Hh signaling strength: the adoption of different cell fates assayed by the expression of TFs that define progenitor identity. These TFs can be divided into two groups: class I TFs that are expressed in the absence of SHH (PAX6) and class II TFs driven by increasing concentrations of SHH (low, NKX6.1; medium, OLIG2; and high, NKX2.2).
Atthog was expressed in the ventral neural tube of E11.5 mouse embryos, a stage when SHH-induced patterning is operative (Figure 8B). Thus, we asked if ATTHOG could modify the important relationship between the SHH concentration and neural differentiation, a quantitative dose-response relationship that is essential to the proper patterning of the neural tube. In WT NPCs, low concentrations of SHH induced the full expression of NKX6.1 and the low-level expression of OLIG2, which depend on low- and medium-strength signaling respectively (Figure 8C). However, high concentrations of SHH were required to trigger NKX2.2 and to suppress PAX6. In Atthog−/− cells, however, low concentrations of SHH were sufficient to drive full expression of NKX2.2 and full suppression of PAX6 (Figure 8C). Thus, the loss of ATTHOG resulted in altered SHH-guided patterning of NPCs: neural progenitor subtypes specified at low concentrations of SHH changed from predominantly NKX6.1+ p2 progenitors to NKX2.2+ p3 progenitors and OLIG2+ motor neuron progenitors. Importantly, the loss of ATTHOG did not change the expression of SOX2, a marker of neural progenitors, showing that the multi-step process of mESC differentiation into NPCs was not influenced by ATTHOG function (Figure 8C).
To measure complete SHH dose-response curves in WT and Atthog−/− NPCs, we took advantage of the previously described GLI-Venus and OLIG2-mKate dual-reporter cells (Figures 3C and 3D). The induction of both GLI-Venus and OLIG2-mKate fluorescence was 10-fold more sensitive to SHH in Atthog−/− cells compared with WT cells. The SHH dose-response curve was shifted to the left in Atthog−/− cells, with the EC50 (the concentration required to attain half-maximal levels of GLI-Venus or OLIG2-mKate fluorescence) of SHH decreasing from ∼10 nM in WT cells to ∼1 nM in Atthog−/− cells (Figures 8D and 8E). As we found in NIH/3T3 cells, the loss of ATTHOG led to the high-level, constitutive accumulation of SMO in the primary cilia of NPCs, suggesting that the mechanism behind the increase in target cell sensitivity is likely to be similar in both cell types (Figures 8F and 8G).
In summary, the loss of ATTHOG sensitized both NIH/3T3s and NPCs to Hh ligands, altering both target gene expression and differentiation outcomes.
Discussion
We describe a set of four genome-wide screens that comprehensively identified positive, negative, and attenuating regulators of the Hh pathway. While we only characterized a handful of genes that met extremely stringent selection criteria (Figure S2A), our screens identified many other genes that have statistically significant, quantitative effects on Hh signaling (Table S1). The dataset generated from these screens will serve as a valuable resource for the discovery of genes relevant both to primary cilia and Hh signaling, and consequently to associated diseases such as ciliopathies and other developmental disorders.
This screening strategy, also used in our previous genetic dissection of the WNT pathway, identified all classes of regulators by using a fluorescent transcriptional reporter that provides a continuous readout of Hh signaling strength. This choice should be contrasted with alternative digital selection schemes based on cell viability, colloquially known as “live/dead” screens. Reporters with continuous readouts, such as fluorescence intensity, allow full control over the stringency of selection applied to the mutant cell library. This flexibility is particularly important when conducting enhancer or suppressor screens in sensitized backgrounds, a powerful and time-honored genetic strategy to elucidate signaling pathways. Indeed, our screen for genes that enhanced signaling in the presence of a low, sub-saturating dose of SHH (Figure 1D) was the most successful in identifying known negative regulators and attenuators compared with screens performed either in the absence of SHH (Figure 1E) or in the presence of saturating SHH (Figure 1C). Similarly, our previous WNT pathway screens identified the attenuator ZNRF3 only when signaling was activated with low ligand concentrations. We propose that varying the ligand concentration provides an easy but powerful method to sensitize screens in cultured cells and thereby reveal hidden layers of regulation that tune signaling strength. This may be particularly relevant for graded signaling pathways initiated by morphogens such as WNT and Hh that can engage distinct differentiation programs at varying concentrations. The screening platform described here should be broadly applicable to uncover genes regulating any cellular process that can be monitored using a fluorescence-based reporter that allows for FACS-based enrichment of cells with the desired phenotype.
In addition to the identification of most components of the Hh pathway and the identification of many genes involved in cilia and ciliopathies, our genetic analysis uncovered a hidden layer of regulation in vertebrate Hh signaling. Three of the top signaling attenuators, Megf8, Mgrn1, and Atthog, all suppressed SMO protein levels at the cell surface and cilium, likely by regulating its endocytosis from the plasma membrane. The loss of these genes led to a ∼10-fold increase in sensitivity to SHH and, consequently, alterations in SHH-induced NPC differentiation outcomes. The most straightforward explanation for this potentiation effect is that high ciliary SMO protein levels overwhelm the inhibitory capacity of PTCH1.
While Atthog was a formerly uncharacterized gene, both Megf8 and Mgrn1 have been studied previously and phenotypes of animals carrying mutations in these genes have been reported. Does this prior analysis support a role for these genes in the Hh pathway as suggested by our screens? Forward genetic screens in mice demonstrated that Megf8 mutations cause embryonic lethality with multi-organ defects. Megf8 was proposed to be a modifier of BMP signaling due to phenotypic similarities with BMP loss-of-function mice, but this correlation was not tested using direct signaling assays. Many phenotypes seen in Megf8−/− mice, such as polydactyly, cardiac development defects, exencephaly, and heterotaxy, are also associated with Hh signaling defects.
Human genetics supports a role of MEGF8 as a Hh pathway modifier. Mutations in MEGF8 cause a subtype of Carpenter's syndrome associated with heterotaxy, congenital cardiac defects, pre-axial polydactyly, and skeletal and craniofacial defects. Some of the skeletal phenotypes seen in these patients, such as hypertelorism and polydactyly, are associated with increased Hh signaling. Strikingly, most individuals with Carpenter's syndrome have mutations in RAB23, which encodes a previously described negative regulator of Hh signaling that was also identified as a top hit in our LoSHH_Top5% screen (Figure 1D). Thus, consistent with our results, the loss of MEGF8 resembles the loss of other known negative regulators of the Hh pathway in both mice and humans.
Mice carrying mutations in Mgrn1 display pigmentation defects and progressive spongiform degeneration, phenotypes not typically associated with Hh signaling. However, Mgrn1−/− embryos have a 40%–60% incidence of embryonic lethality, which has only been partially characterized. A subset of these embryos (∼25%) display heterotaxy and complex cardiac anomalies, phenotypes that overlap with Megf8−/− mice. Both phenotypes can be associated with impaired ciliary function or Hh signaling. The lack of a strong embryonic Hh phenotype in these mice may be because Mgrn1 is redundant with Rnf157 in vertebrates (Figure S4B).
The common influence on SMO stability and the common signaling phenotype points to the possibility that Megf8, Mgrn1, and Atthog function in the same pathway. In fact, MGRN1 and MEGF8 are annotated as interaction partners in the high-quality BioPlex protein interaction database (http://bioplex.hms.harvard.edu/). MGRN1 has been shown to function with ATTRACTIN (ATRN), a paralog of MEGF8, to downregulate the MC4R melanocortin receptor. Loss-of-function mutations in either Mgrn1 or Atrn lead to elevated cell-surface levels of MC4R, analogous to our observation that disruption of Mgrn1 or Megf8 lead to increased cell-surface and ciliary levels of SMO. Hence, the common biochemical function of MEGF8, ATRN, and other related proteins may be to target selected GPCRs for ubiquitination and downregulation by MGRN1 and related RING-finger cytoplasmic E3 ligases.
We end by noting that the post-translational mechanism of SMO regulation uncovered by our screens is conceptually analogous to the intensively studied mechanism that attenuates WNT signaling by decreasing the cell-surface levels of Frizzled (FZD) proteins, receptors for WNT ligands that are the closest relatives of SMO in the GPCR superfamily. In vertebrates, two transmembrane E3 ubiquitin ligases, ZNRF3 and RNF43, dampen sensitivity to WNT ligands by reducing cell-surface levels of FZD receptors (reviewed in). Ligands of the R-Spondin family bind and neutralize ZNRF3/RNF43 with the assistance of LGR co-receptors, allowing FZD levels and WNT sensitivity to dramatically increase in specific tissues during development and in specific stem cell compartments in adults. Future work will investigate whether Megf8, Mgrn1, or Atthog are regulated either by Hh ligands themselves or by other signals to potentiate or attenuate Hh signaling.
STAR★Methods
Key Resources Table
REAGENT or RESOURCE	SOURCE	IDENTIFIER	 	Antibodies	 		 	Mouse monoclonal anti-GLI1 (clone L42B10)	Cell Signaling	Cat#2643; RRID: AB_2294746	 	Goat polyclonal anti-GLI3	R and D Systems	Cat#AF3690; RRID: AB_2232499	 	Rabbit polyclonal anti-p38	Abcam	Cat#ab7952; RRID: AB_306166	 	Mouse monoclonal anti-1D4	The University of British Columbia	RRID: AB_325050	 	Mouse monoclonal anti-Alpha Tubulin (clone DM1A)	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat#T6199; RRID: AB_477583	 	Mouse monoclonal anti-Acetylated Tubulin	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat#T6793; RRID: AB_477585	 	Mouse monoclonal anti-NKX2.2	DSHB	Cat#74.5A5; RRID: AB_531794	 	Mouse monoclonal anti-NKX6.1	DSHB	Cat#F55A10; RRID: AB_532378	 	Rabbit polyclonal anti-PAX6	EMD Millipore	Cat# AB2237; RRID: AB_1587367	 	Alexa Fluor 488 conjugated anti-Giantin	Covance	Cat# A488-114L; RRID: AB_389880	 	Rabbit polyclonal anti-PTCH1		N/A	 	Rabbit polyclonal anti-SMO	 and 	N/A	 	Rabbit polyclonal anti-SUFU		N/A	 	Guinea pig polyclonal anti-OLIG2		N/A	 	Rabbit polyclonal anti-IQCE		N/A	 	Guinea pig polyclonal anti-GLI2		N/A	 	Guinea pig polyclonal anti-ARL13B		N/A	 	Donkey anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L) Highly Cross-Adsorbed Secondary Antibody, Alexa Fluor 488	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat#A-21206; RRID: AB_2535792	 	Alexa Fluor® 488 AffiniPure Donkey Anti-Guinea Pig IgG (H+L)	Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories	Cat#706-545-148; RRID: AB_2340472	 	Donkey anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L) Highly Cross-Adsorbed Secondary Antibody, Alexa Fluor 594	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat#A-21207; RRID: AB_141637	 	Donkey anti-Mouse IgG (H+L) Secondary Antibody, Alexa Fluor 647	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat#A-31571; RRID: AB_162542	 	Alexa Fluor® 647 AffiniPure Donkey Anti-Guinea Pig IgG (H+L)	Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories	Cat#706-605-148; RRID: AB_2340476	 	Peroxidase AffiniPure Donkey Anti-Mouse IgG (H+L)	Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories	Cat#715-035-150; RRID: AB_2340770	 	Peroxidase AffiniPure Donkey Anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L)	Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories	Cat#111-035-144; RRID: AB_2307391	 	Peroxidase AffiniPure Donkey Anti-Goat IgG (H+L)	Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories	Cat#705-035-003; RRID: AB_2340390	 		 	Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins	 		 	Sonic hedgehog		N/A	 	WNT3A	R&D Systems	Cat#1324-WN-002	 	BMP4	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat#PHC9534	 	Bafilomycin A1	LC Labs	Cat#B-1080	 	Leupeptin	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat#L2884	 	Vismodegib	LC Labs	Cat#V-4050	 	Polybrene	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat#H9268	 	Puromycin	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat#P8833	 	Blasticidin	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat#R210-01	 	bFGF	R and D Systems	Cat#3139-FB-025	 	Retinoic Acid	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat#R2625	 	CHIR99021	Axon Medchem LLC	Cat#Axon 1386	 	PD 98059	Axon Medchem LLC	Cat#Axon 1223	 	ESGRO LIF	EMD Millipore	Cat#ESG1106	 	Polyethylenimine	Polysciences, Inc	Cat#23966-1	 	Anti-DIG alkaline phosphatase Fab fragments	Roche	Cat#11093274910	 	NBT/BCIP	Roche	Cat#11681451001	 		 	Critical Commercial Assays	 		 	X-tremeGENE 9	Roche	Cat#06366236001	 	Mouse ES Cell Nucleofector Kit	Lonza	Cat#VAPH-1001	 	Power SYBR Green Cells-to-CT Kit	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat#4402955	 	MiSeq Reagent Kit v3	Illumina	Cat#MS-102-3001	 	DIG RNA Labeling Kit	Roche	Cat#11175025910	 		 	Deposited Data	 		 	All Fastq files from NGS	NIH Short Read Archive (SRA)	SRP116669	 		 	Experimental Models: Cell Lines	 		 	NIH/3T3-Flp In	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat#R76107	 	293FT	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat#R70007	 	NIH/3T3-Flp In Cep350-/-	This paper	N/A	 	NIH/3T3-Flp In Rab34-/-	This paper	N/A	 	NIH/3T3-Flp In Fkbp10-/-	This paper	N/A	 	NIH/3T3-Flp In Tubd1-/-	This paper	N/A	 	NIH/3T3-Flp In Pdcl-/-	This paper	N/A	 	NIH/3T3-Flp In Atthog-/-	This paper	N/A	 	NIH/3T3-Flp In Ccm2-/-	This paper	N/A	 	NIH/3T3-Flp In Megf8-/-	This paper	N/A	 	NIH/3T3-Flp In Mesdc1-/-	This paper	N/A	 	NIH/3T3-Flp In Pdcd10-/-	This paper	N/A	 	NIH/3T3-Flp In Mgrn1-/-	This paper	N/A	 	NIH/3T3-Flp In Ptch1-/-	This paper	N/A	 	NIH/3T3-Flp In Sufu-/-	This paper	N/A	 	HM1 mESC GBS-Venus and Olig2-mKate	doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/104307	N/A	 	HM1 mESC Cep350-/-	This paper	N/A	 	HM1 mESC Rab34-/-	This paper	N/A	 	HM1 mESC Tubd1-/-	This paper	N/A	 	HM1 mESC Pdcl-/-	This paper	N/A	 	HM1 mESC Atthog-/-	This paper	N/A	 	HM1 mESC Ccm2-/-	This paper	N/A	 	HM1 mESC Megf8-/-	This paper	N/A	 	HM1 mESC Mesdc1-/-	This paper	N/A	 	HM1 mESC Pdcd10-/-	This paper	N/A	 	HM1 mESC Mgrn1-/-	This paper	N/A	 		 	Oligonucleotides	 		 	NGS-1st PCR Fwd: 5’-AATGGACTATCATATGCTTACCGTAACTTGAAAGTATTTCG-3’	This paper	N/A	 	NGS-1st PCR Rev: 5’-CTCGGTGCCACTTTTTCAAGTTGATAACGG-3’	This paper	N/A	 		 	Recombinant DNA	 		 	pEF5/FRT/V5-DEST-Atthog-1D4	This paper	N/A	 	Brie mouse CRISPR knockout pooled library		Addgene #73633	 	lentiCas9-Blast		Addgene #52962	 	lentiCRISPR v2		Addgene #52961	 	pMD2.G	Didier Trono Lab, EPFL, Switzerland	Addgene #12259	 	psPAX2	Didier Trono Lab, EPFL, Switzerland	Addgene #12260	 	pSpCas9(BB)-2A-GFP (PX458)		Addgene #48138	 	pSpCas9(BB)-2A-mCherry	This paper	N/A	 	pSpCas9(BB)-2A-Puro (PX459)		Addgene #48139	 		 	Software and Algorithms	 		 	CRISPR Design	Feng Zhang Lab, MIT, USA	http://crispr.mit.edu	 	MAGeCK computational tool		https://sourceforge.net/p/mageck/wiki/Home/	 	Leica Application Suite X	Leica Microsystems	http://www.leica-microsystems.com/products/microscope-software/details/product/leica-las-x-ls/	 	Fiji		https://fiji.sc	 	MATLAB R2014a	MathWorks	https://www.mathworks.com	 	GraphPad Prism version 6	GraphPad Software	https://www.graphpad.com/scientific-software/prism/	 	R (version 3.3.2)	The R Foundation for Statistical Computing	https://www.r-project.org	 	Adobe Photoshop CS6	Adobe Systems	http://www.adobe.com/products/photoshop.html	 	Adobe Illustrator CS6	Adobe Systems	http://www.adobe.com/products/illustrator.html
Contact for Reagent and Resource Sharing
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Rajat Rohatgi (rrohatgi@stanford.edu).
Experimental Model and Subject Details
Cell Culture
Flp-In-3T3 (a derivative of NIH/3T3 cells) and 293FT cell lines were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific and used without further authentication. Information on the gender of cell lines is not available. A Flp-In-3T3 stable cell line expressing tagged Atthog was generated as previously described. NIH/3T3 cells expressing GLI-GFP and Cas9 were generated by transduction of the previously described NIH/3T3-GLI-GFP line with lentiCas9-Blast (Addgene #52962), followed by selection with Blasticidin (2 μg/ml). Single cells were sorted using FACSAria II (BD) and multiple clones were analyzed for optimal Cas9 expression and SHH induced GFP reporter fluorescence. A clonal cell line (NIH3T3-CG) that displayed robust on-target genome editing activity with multiple positive control sgRNAs and also displayed the widest dynamic range for SHH-induced GFP reporter fluorescence was chosen for further studies (Figure S1). All the above mentioned cell lines were cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) containing high glucose (Thermo Scientific) and supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Atlanta Biologicals), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Gibco), 2 mM L-Glutamine (Gemini Biosciences), 1x MEM non-essential amino acids solution (Gibco), penicillin (40 U/ml) and streptomycin (40 μg/ml) (Gemini Biosciences), in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 at 37°C. Maintenance of mESCs and their differentiation into NPCs is described below. Stocks of cell lines and derivatives were free of mycoplasma contamination.
To initiate Hh signaling, NIH/3T3 cells were first ciliated by growth to confluence in DMEM containing 10% FBS followed by serum starvation in DMEM containing 0.5% FBS for 24 h. A detailed description of all treatment protocols are included in the “Ligand and small molecule inhibitor treatment protocols” section.
Neural Progenitor Differentiation Assays
The construction and use of the HM1 mESC line harboring the GLI-Venus and OLIG2-mKate dual reporter system to evaluate Hh signaling has been described previously in detail (doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/104307). The parental HM1 mESC line is derived from a male mouse. For mESC maintenance, feeders were plated onto dishes coated with 0.1% gelatin (Sigma-Aldrich) overnight. ESCs were cultured with feeders in mESC media (DMEM containing high glucose, 15% Optima FBS (Atlanta Biologicals), 1x MEM non-essential amino acids, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 2 mM L-glutamine, 1% EmbryoMax nucleosides (Millipore), 55 μM 2-mercaptoethanol (Gibco), and 1000 U/ml ESGRO LIF (Millipore)). mESCs were differentiated into spinal neural progenitors using a previously described protocol with minor modifications. Briefly, mESCs were cleared from feeder cells and plated onto either gelatin coated glass coverslips (12mm diameter, placed in a 24-well plate) at a density of 50,000 cells/coverslip (immunofluorescence staining) or onto gelatin coated CellBIND plates (Corning) at a density of 100,000 cells/6-well (FACS) or 500,000 cells/10 cm plate (Western Blotting). Differentiations were conducted in N2B27 media (Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium F12 (Gibco) and Neurobasal Medium (Gibco) (1:1 ratio) supplemented with N-2 Supplement (Gibco), B-27 Supplement (Gibco), 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gemini Bio-Products), 2mM L-glutamine (Gemini Bio-Products), 40 μg/ml Bovine Serum Albumin (Sigma), and 55 μM 2-mercaptoethanol (Gibco)). On the day the cells were plated (Day 0) and Day 1, the N2B27 medium was supplemented with 10 ng/ml bFGF (R&D). On Day 2, 10 ng/ml bFGF (R&D) and 5 μM CHIR99021 (Axon) were added to the N2B27 culture medium. On Day 3, cells were cultured in N2B27 medium containing RA (100 nM, Sigma-Aldrich) or RA with different doses of SHH. A fresh medium change with the same ingredients was done on Day 4 and Day 5. On Day 6, cells were rinsed with PBS and either fixed with 4% PFA (immunofluorescence staining), trypsinized (FACS analysis), or lysed for Western Blot analysis.
Method Details
Constructs
Mouse Atthog was tagged with a C-terminal 1D4 and cloned into pEF5/FRT/V5-DEST vector (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Reagents and Antibodies
Recombinant SHH was expressed in bacteria and purified as previously described. Recombinant WNT3A and BMP4 were purchased from R&D Systems and Thermo Fisher Scientific, respectively. Leupeptin, puromycin, blasticidin, and polybrene were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Vismodegib and Bafilomycin A1 were purchased from LC Labs. The following primary antibodies were used: mouse anti-GLI1 (2643; Cell Signaling; 1:1000), goat anti-GLI3 (AF3690; R&D; 1:200), rabbit anti-p38 (ab7952; Abcam; 1:2000), mouse anti-1D4 (The University of British Columbia; 1:5000), mouse α-Tubulin (T6199; Sigma-Aldrich; 1:10000), mouse acetylated-Tubulin (T6793; Sigma-Aldrich; 1:10000), mouse anti-NKX6.1 (F55A10, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank; 1:100), mouse anti-NKX2.2 (74.5A5, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank; 1:100), rabbit anti-PAX6 (AB2237; EMD Millipore; 1:1000), and Alexa Fluor 488 conjugated anti-Giantin (A488-114L; Covance; 1:500). Polyclonal antibodies against PTCH1, SMO (against both intracellular and extracellular epitopes), SUFU, IQCE, GLI2, ARL13B, and OLIG2 have been described previously. Secondary antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidase or Alexa Fluor dyes were obtained from Jackson Laboratories and Thermo Fisher Scientific.
Ligand and Small Molecule Inhibitor Treatment Protocols
Throughout the text, the terms NoSHH, LoSHH, and HiSHH refer, respectively, to treatment with no SHH, a low, sub-saturating concentration of SHH, or a high, near-saturating concentration of SHH (see Figure S1B for the position of the LoSHH and HiSHH concentrations on the dose-response curve). For the directed experiments in NIH/3T3 cells, LoSHH and HiSHH concentrations used were 1 nM and 25 nM. For the genome-wide screens, LoSHH and HiSHH concentrations used were 3.2 nM and 25 nM. For NPCs, the LoSHH and HiSHH concentrations used were 5 nM and 25 nM. NIH/3T3 cells were treated with SHH for either 24 hours (CRISPR screens, qRT-PCR, immunoblotting, cycloheximide chase assay, SMO degradation, and internalization assays) or 6 hours (immunofluorescence studies). For NPCs, the duration of SHH exposure was 72 hours for all assays. Vismodegib was used at 1 μM. WNT3A was used at 200 ng/ml for 9 h and BMP4 was used at 50 ng/ml for 5 h.
Pooled Genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 Screens
Our screen design was influenced by the lessons learned during our work on dissecting the WNT pathway using genetic screens in human haploid cells. Since haploid cells lack primary cilia and so cannot transduce Hh signals, we used NIH/3T3 cells, mouse embryonic fibroblasts that are characterized by a robust transcriptional response to SHH. To isolate mutant cells with the desired Hh signaling phenotype, we used a fluorescence-based, quantitative transcriptional reporter of Hh signaling, which allowed the use of FACS to enrich cells with enhanced or reduced signaling phenotypes. The concentration-dependent properties of Hh ligands during development motivated us to perform screens at different concentrations of SHH. The Brie CRISPR library (Addgene #73633) was used to generate our genome-wide collection of mutant NIH/3T3 cells because this moderately sized library, which targets each of 19,674 mouse genes with ∼4 short guide RNAs (sgRNAs) and includes 1000 non-targeting controls, provided the optimal balance between genome-wide coverage and the tractability of conducting multiple screens under varying conditions using a labor-intensive FACS-based enrichment scheme.
Brie library amplification, lentiviral production, functional titer determination, and transduction were performed as described previously with minor modifications. Briefly, the Brie library was amplified in Endura electrocompetent cells (Lucigen) and subjected to Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) to determine sgRNA distribution. For lentivirus production, 18 million 293FT cells were seeded in T225 flasks (40 flasks in total) and transfected the following day with 3.4 μg pMD2.G (Addgene #12259), 6.8 μg psPAX2 (Addgene#12260), and 13.6 μg lentiviral target (CRISPR) plasmid, and 195 μl of 1 mg/ml polyethylenimine (Polysciences). 48 h post transfection, lentivirus was harvested, filtered through a 0.45 μ filter, aliquoted into multiple 50 ml tubes and stored at -80°C. The functional titer of the lentivirus was determined by crystal violent staining. GLI-Reporter cell line stably expressing Cas9 (NIH/3T3-CG) was transduced with the Brie library at a Multiplicity of Infection (MOI) =0.3 (364 million cells were transduced with 109 million Transduction Units (TUs) to achieve ∼1000 fold representation of each sgRNA) in the presence of 10 μg/ml polybrene. 48 h post infection, cells were split and selected with puromycin (2 μg/ml) for seven days and frozen in aliquots of 5 million cells/vial. Genomic DNA (gDNA) was extracted from cells using Quick-gDNA Midiprep kit (Zymo Research) and subjected to NGS to determine sgRNA distribution. In all screens, 15 million cells were initially thawed into 3x15 cm plates and two days later split into 5x15 cm plates. Confluent cells were serum starved and left untreated (NoSHH) or treated for 24 h with SHH (LoSHH=3.2 nM or HiSHH=25 nM). Cells were trypsinized and 4 million cells were pelleted and frozen (unsorted population) and the remaining ∼30 million cells (corresponding to 300-fold representation of each sgRNA in the Brie library) were sorted for cells with the lowest 10% of GFP fluorescence (HiSHH_Bot10% screen) or the highest 5% of GFP fluorescence (HiSHH_Top5%, LoSHH_Top5%, and NoSHH_Top5% screens). Each screen was performed twice under identical conditions.
Genomic DNA was extracted from unsorted and sorted cells and the sgRNA library was amplified by a two-step PCR protocol for NGS. In the first step, multiple PCR reactions (100 μl each) were set up to make sure that the entire gDNA was amplified using the following primers (NGS-1st PCR Fwd: 5’-aatggactatcatatgcttaccgtaacttgaaagtatttcg-3’ and NGS-1st PCR Rev: 5’-ctcggtgccactttttcaagttgataacgg-3’). PCR product from multiple PCR reactions was pooled and 5 μl was used as a template for the second step PCR (100 μl reaction) using NGS library barcoded primers. The final PCR product was purified, quantified by qRT-PCR and subjected to sequencing on Illumina MiSeq with 45 cycles of read 1 using a custom primer (5’-gctcttccgatcttcttgtggaaaggacgaaacaccg-3’) and 8 cycles of read 2 using Illumina index primer. In all the screens, we averaged ∼100 reads per sgRNA in the library. For analysis, reads from the fastq files generated by sequencing were tallied for each guide by taking the first 20 base-pairs from each read and mapping that sequence to the identical short guide RNA sequence. For each screen, a table of reads per guide that includes the counts from the sorted and unsorted populations from both replicates was generated. The tables generated from the two independent duplicates of each screen were analyzed together by the MAGeCK computational tool, specifying the 1000 control sgRNAs for normalization and generation of the null distribution for MAGeCK with the “--control-sgrna” option and computing the log fold change for the gene using the mean of all of the guides for a given gene with the “--gene-lfc-method mean” option.
Knockout of Candidate Genes in Pooled Cell Lines
The top two sgRNAs targeting candidate genes (based on MAGeCK analysis) were individually cloned into lentiCRISPR v2 plasmid (Addgene #52961). Lentivirus was produced as described above and used to infect GLI-Reporter NIH/3T3 cells, followed by selection with puromycin for 7 days. Pooled cell lines were analyzed by FACS for GFP fluorescence after treatment with LoSHH, HiSHH or NoSHH (see Figure S2 and associated text).
Clonal Cell Lines Carrying Deletions in Candidate Genes
Clonal knockout NIH/3T3 lines carrying deletions in candidate genes were generated using a dual sgRNA strategy. Briefly, two sgRNAs targeting candidate genes with an interval spanning anywhere from 50-600 bases (see Table S3) were designed using the CRISPR Design Tool (http://crispr.mit.edu) and cloned into pSpCas9(BB)-2A-GFP (PX458; Addgene #48138) and pSpCas9(BB)-2A-mCherry, the latter generated by replacing the GFP cassette in PX458 with mCherry. Five days after co-transfection into NIH/3T3 cells using X-tremeGENE 9 (Roche), GFP and mCherry double positive single cells were sorted into a 96-well plate using FACSAria II. Clonal lines were screened by PCR to detect excision of the genomic DNA between the two sgRNA cut sites (gels showing successful editing of candidate genes are shown in Table S3). When possible, knockout clones were further confirmed by Western Blotting using commercially available antibodies (Rab34, Pdcl, and Mgrn1). Clonal knockout mESCs were generated using the same two sgRNAs for each gene used in NIH/3T3 cells (see Table S3). For mESCs, sgRNAs were cloned into plasmid PX459 (Addgene #48139). Plasmids were electroporated into mESCs using the Lonza nucleofection system (Nucleofector 2b Device using the program A-023 and Lonza Cell Nucleofector Kit #VAPH-1001). mESCs were cultured under feeder free conditions in 2i media (Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium F12 (Gibco) and Neurobasal Medium (Gibco) (1:1 ratio) supplemented with N-2 Supplement (Gibco), B-27 Supplement (Gibco), 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gemini Bio-Products), 2mM L-glutamine (Gemini Bio-Products), 40 μg/ml Bovine Serum Albumin (Sigma), 55 μM 2-mercaptoethanol (Gibco), 5 μM CHIR99021 (Axon), 1 μM PD 98059 (Axon), and 1000 U/ml ESGRO LIF (Millipore)). 24 h post nucleofection, cells were selected with 1.5 μg/ml puromycin for 48 h. One week later, individual mESC colonies were manually picked, expanded, and screened by PCR to detect deletion of the genomic DNA segment between the two guides (see Table S3).
Real-Time Quantitative Reverse Transcription PCR (Real-Time qRT-PCR)
Real-Time qRT-PCR was performed using the Power SYBR Green Cells-to-CT Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on a QuantStudio 5 Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with custom designed primers for Gli1 (Fwd: 5’-ccaagccaactttatgtcaggg-3’ and Rev: 5’-agcccgcttctttgttaatttga-3’), Axin2 (Fwd: 5’-aaacggattcaggtccttca-3’ and Rev: 5’-caaagacatagccggaacct-3’), Id1 (Fwd: 5’-aacggcgagatcagtgcctt-3’ and Rev:5’- cctcagcgacacaagatgcgat-3’), and Gapdh (Fwd: 5’-agtggcaaagtggagatt-3’ and Rev: 5’-gtggagtcatactggaaca-3’). Transcript levels relative to gapdh were calculated using the ΔCt method.
Western Blotting
Whole cell extracts from NIH/3T3 cells and NPCs were prepared in RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH-7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 2% NP-40, 0.25% Deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1mM DTT, 10% glycerol, 1x SIGMAFAST protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich), and 1x PhosSTOP (Roche)). Samples were resuspended in NuPAGE-LDS sample buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), incubated at 37°C for 30 min, and subjected to SDS-PAGE. The resolved proteins were transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane (Bio-Rad) using a wet electroblotting system (Bio-Rad) followed by immunoblotting.
SMO Trafficking Assays
Biotinylation of cell surface SMO with a non-cell permeable, thiol-cleavable probe was performed as described previously. Briefly, cell culture plates were removed from the 37°C incubator and placed on an ice-chilled metal rack in a 4°C cold room. Growth medium was removed and cells were quickly washed thrice with ice-cold DPBS+ buffer (Dulbecco’s PBS supplemented with 0.9 mM CaCl2, 0.49 mM MgCl2.6H2O, 5.6 mM dextrose, and 0.3 mM sodium pyruvate). Cells were incubated with a freshly prepared solution of 0.4 mM Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in DPBS+ buffer for 30 min. Unreacted Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin was quenched with Tris pH 7.4 at 50 mM for 10 min. Cells were then washed thrice with 1x Tris-buffered saline (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 137 mM NaCl, and 2.7 mM KCl) and whole cell extracts were prepared in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl pH-7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 2% NP-40, 0.25% Deoxycholate, 1x Sigma-Fast protease inhibitor cocktail, and 1x Roche phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. Biotinylated proteins from clarified supernatants were captured on a streptavidin agarose resin (Solulink), washed, eluted in NuPAGE-LDS sample buffer containing 100 mM DTT at 37°C for 1 h to cleave and release biotinylated proteins, and assayed by immunoblotting. For degradation assays (shown in Figures 7C and 7D), cells were transferred to a 37°C incubator after cell-surface biotinylation and samples were harvested in a 4°C cold room after 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 h. For internalization assays (shown in Figures 7E and 7F), cells were pre-treated with 100 nM Bafilomycin A1 and 50 μM Leupeptin for 2 h to block lysosomal degradation. Cell-surface proteins were biotinylated as described above (with the exception that Bafilomycin A1 and Leupeptin were included at every step) and then transferred to a 37°C incubator for 0, 5, 10, and 20 minutes before being returned to 4°C. To estimate the amount of biotinylated SMO that was internalized during the 37°C incubation period, cells were treated twice with glutathione (50 mM glutathione, 75 mM NaCl, 75 mM NaOH, and 10% FBS in water) at 4°C for 15 min to cleave the biotin attached to any SMO left on the cell surface. Any biotinylated SMO that was internalized would be protected from glutathione cleavage. After quenching unreacted glutathione with iodoacetamide buffer (50 mM iodoacetamide and 1% BSA in D-PBS+ buffer) at 4°C for 20 min, cells were lysed (in the continued presence of 50 mM iodoacetamide) and the amount of biotinylated SMO remaining was assessed by streptavidin pull down followed by immunoblotting.
In Situ Hybridization
Atthog specific primers were designed using the program Primer3 (Fwd: 5’-acacgtgtgtgctgaaaagc-3’ and Rev: 5’- gagattaaccctcactaaagggatgagcaggtaacccatctcc-3’).’ The underlined sequence marks the T3 polymerase binding site incorporated into the reverse primer. The Atthog probe was generated using a Digoxigenin (DIG) RNA Labeling Kit (Roche). Briefly, the probe was generated from the in vitro transcription of PCR products amplified from mouse neural progenitor cell cDNA. After overnight hybridization at 70°C, the signal was visualized using anti-DIG-alkaline phosphatase (AP) Fab fragments (Roche) and NBT/BCIP (Roche).
Analysis of Cilia Protein Localization by Immunofluorescence
Immunofluorescence staining of 1D4 tagged ATTHOG, endogenous SMO, PTCH1, GLI2, acTub, and ARL13B was performed as described previously. Staining of cell-surface SMO using an antibody against its extracellular domain was performed by excluding detergent from the blocking and antibody incubation steps. For cilia internalization assays (shown in Figures 7G and 7H), cell-surface SMO was labeled with the anti-SMO primary antibody at 4°C. Cells were then transferred to 37°C to allow trafficking for 0.25, 0.45, 1.5, 2, 3, and 4 h, followed by immediate fixation with 4% PFA and subsequent staining with a secondary antibody without cell permeabilization to only detect cell-surface SMO. After a second fixation step and washing, cells were permeabilized, stained with a cilia marker and imaged to quantify levels of SMO at primary cilia (see below for quantification details). Fluorescent images were collected on a Leica TCS SP5 confocal imaging system equipped with a 63x oil immersion objective with identical gain, offset, and laser power settings. Z-stacks covering 4 microns were captured and a max-projection of the z-stack was used for fluorescent intensity quantifications. Representative images were captured on the 63x oil objective with an 8x digital zoom option and processed with identical settings using Fiji (https://fiji.sc).
For quantification of ciliary SMO and PTCH1 levels, Leica Image Files (LIF) were converted into matrices in MATLAB R2014a (MathWorks) using the bfmatlab toolbox. A max-z-projection was performed for each set of planes in a given field, followed by quantification of the cilia and protein-of-interest through the following steps. First, a two-dimensional median filter was applied to the cilia channel (acTub or ARL13B) to remove fine noise, followed by a high-pass user-defined threshold for signal versus noise to generate a cilia mask in the cilia channel. Any group of contiguous pixels that had signal was labeled as a “potential cilium” and measured for area, eccentricity, solidity, intensity, and length. If the “potential cilium” did not meet the static thresholds for eccentricity or solidity, it was discarded from the dataset; if the “potential cilium” did not meet the user-defined thresholds for minimum area or minimum intensity, it was also discarded. Additionally, if the “potential cilium” was within a user-defined distance of another “potential cilium,” then it was also discarded to avoid misquantification of false positives arising from non-specific staining. If a “potential cilium” met these tests, each pixel that composed the cilium was noted and mapped to the matrix that held the intensity values for the protein-of-interest channel. To generate the final intensity value for the protein-of-interest, the mean intensity of the pixels mapping to the protein-of-interest channel was calculated, and then a background correction was performed. This correction was performed by calculating the average intensity in a 100x100 pixel grid around each pixel in the protein-of-interest channel, followed by subtraction from the mean intensity. The final, protein-of-interest intensity value for each identified cilium was recorded along with the area and length of the cilium. For quantification of ciliary GLI2 levels, additional sets of parameters were included because GLI2 staining does not always perfectly overlap with the marker used to identify cilia (ARL13B). Therefore, we expanded the box encompassing an identified cilium by about 2.5 times to search for the GLI2 signal. The pixels contained in this box were then mapped to the GLI2 channel. A high-pass user-defined threshold for signal versus noise in the GLI2 channel was applied to generate a GLI2 mask, and any group of contiguous pixels that had signal was labeled as “potential GLI2” and measured for area and intensity. The “potential GLI2” object that had the maximum intensity and the largest area was taken as the true GLI2 signal, and the mean intensity of these pixels was calculated. A background-correction for the final GLI2 intensity value was performed in an identical manner as described earlier for SMO and PTCH1 quantifications. The scripts used for cilia imaging are publicly available at Github (https://github.com/heybhaven/Cilia_protein_quantification).
Protein localization data at cilia were displayed using violin plots, generated from background-corrected, fluorescence values from ∼100 cilia per condition, unless otherwise noted. In a violin plot, the width of the shaded area represents the kernel probability density or the proportion of data located in a fluorescence interval centered at that point. Inside each violin, the median fluorescence and interquartile ranges are depicted as a circle and vertical line, respectively. Violin plots were generated in R (version 3.3.2) with the “ggplot2” package.
Protein Sequence Analysis, Domain Identification, and Phylogenetic Analysis
Iterative sequence profile searches were performed using the PSI-BLAST program run against the NCBI non-redundant (NR) protein database. Multiple sequence alignments were built using the Kalign2 and Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) based alignment methodology as implemented in the program GISMO. Alignments were later manually adjusted based on profile-profile, secondary structure information, and structural alignments. Similarity-based clustering for both classification and discarding of nearly identical sequences was performed using the BLASTCLUST program (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/blast/documents/blastclust.html). Secondary structures were predicted using the JPred and HHpred programs. For previously characterized domains, the PFAM database was used as a guide. Clustering with BLASTCLUST followed by multiple sequence alignment and further sequence profile searches were used to identify domains that were not detected by the original Pfam models. Structural visualization and manipulations were performed using the PyMol program (http://www.pymol.org). To assess the phylogenetic relationships, an approximate maximum likelihood method as implemented in the FasTree program was used. To upsurge the accuracy of topology, we augmented the number of rounds of minimum-evolution subtree-prune-regraft (SPR) moves to 4 (-spr 4) as well as utilized the options -mlacc and -slownni to make the maximum-likelihood nearest-neighbor interchanges (NNIs) more exhaustive. The FigTree program was used to render phylogenetic trees (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/). The in-house TASS package, which comprises a collection of Perl scripts, was used to automate aspects of large-scale analysis of sequences. Organism abbreviations used in the figure panels (alphabetical order): Acar, Anolis carolinensis; Adig, Acropora digitifera; Aque, Amphimedon queenslandica; Bbel, Branchiostoma belcheri; Bflo, Branchiostoma floridae; Bgla, Biomphalaria glabrate; Cele, Caenorhabditis elegans; Cgig, Crassostrea gigas; Cint, Ciona intestinalis; Ctel, Capitella teleta; Dmel, Drosophila melanogaster; Dpul, Daphnia pulex; Drer, Danio rerio; Epal, Exaiptasia pallida; Ggal, Gallus gallus; Hduj, Hypsibius dujardini; Hsap, Homo sapiens; Isca, Ixodes scapularis; Lana, Lingula anatine; Lcha, Latimeria chalumnae; Mbre, Monosiga brevicollis; Mmus, Mus musculus; Nvec, Nematostella vectensis; Obim, Octopus bimaculoides; Pcau, Priapulus caudatus; Skow, Saccoglossus kowalevskii; Spur, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus; Xlae, Xenopus laevis.
Gene Ontology (GO) Analysis
A list composed of 641 genes, which includes genes identified as hits in all four screens with an FDR-corrected p-value≤0.1, was used as the input to query the DAVID Functional Annotation Tool to find enriched GO Terms or the Jensen DISEASES library of gene-disease associations using the Enrichr server. The p-values reported are the ones corrected for multiple hypothesis testing.
Quantification and Statistical Analysis
All four screens (Figures 1B–1E) were performed twice under independent conditions and the duplicates from each screen were analyzed together using the MAGeCK tool. For Phase I of the validation (Figure S2A), two cell lines expressing different sgRNAs against each candidate gene were generated. Cell lines expressing short guides against putative positive regulators (Figure S2B) were analyzed three independent times and cell lines expressing short guides against putative negative regulators (Figures S2C–S2E) were analyzed two independent times. Within each of these independent experiments, each measurement represents median fluorescence from ∼10,000 cells analyzed by FACS.
For Phase II of the validation (Figure 3), 2-3 independent clonal cell lines (represented by circles, triangles or squares in the Figure 3) were isolated for each genotype and the mean Gli1 mRNA levels (Figures 3A and 3B) or median reporter fluorescence (Figures 3C and 3D) across these independent clonal cell lines was averaged and depicted as bars. For each cell line, the Gli1 mRNA levels were taken as the average from two technical duplicates and the average median reporter fluorescence (∼10,000 cells) from two independent experiments. Thus, Phase II of validation was scored based on reproducibility across multiple, independent clonal cell lines, not just across biological or technical replicates in the same cell line.
All the cell biological and biochemical experiments shown in Figures 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 to characterize each of the six genes that emerged from Phase II of the validation were performed at least twice in each of two independent clonal cell lines, with similar results. Space permitting, data from two clonal cell lines is shown together. In some cases, analysis of only one clonal cell line is shown in the main figure, with data from the second clonal cell line presented in a supplemental figure panel noted in the figure legend. A phenotype is discussed in the text only if it was observed in both clonal lines.
The statistical significance between two groups was determined by an unpaired Student’s t-test (Hh FACS reporter assays and qRT-PCR data). The statistical significance of fluorescent intensity comparisons between two or multiple groups was determined by Mann-Whitney and Kruskal-Wallis non-parametric ANOVA tests, respectively.
Data and Software Availability
All Fastq files from NGS have been deposited into the NIH Short Read Archive (SRA) with Study accession number SRP116669. The scripts used for cilia imaging are publicly available at Github (https://github.com/heybhaven/Cilia_protein_quantification).
Supplemental Information
Supplemental Information includes seven figures and three tables and can be found with this article online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2017.12.003.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PMID 33185187 — Genome-wide CRISPR screen identifies noncanonical NF-κB signaling as a regulator of density-dependent proliferation.
eLife (2020) · https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33185187/

Genome-wide CRISPR screen identifies noncanonical NF-κB signaling as a regulator of density-dependent proliferation
Epithelial cells possess intrinsic mechanisms to maintain an appropriate cell density for normal tissue morphogenesis and homeostasis. Defects in such mechanisms likely contribute to hyperplasia and cancer initiation. To identify genes that regulate the density-dependent proliferation of murine mammary epithelial cells, we developed a fluorescence-activated cell sorting assay based on fluorescence ubiquitination cell cycle indicator, which marks different stages of the cell cycle with distinct fluorophores. Using this powerful assay, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 knockout screen, selecting for cells that proliferate normally at low density but continue to divide at high density. Unexpectedly, one top hit was Traf3, a negative regulator of NF-κB signaling that has never previously been linked to density-dependent proliferation. We demonstrate that loss of Traf3 specifically activates noncanonical NF-κB signaling. This in turn triggers an innate immune response and drives cell division independently of known density-dependent proliferation mechanisms, including YAP/TAZ signaling and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, by blocking entry into quiescence.
Introduction
An important characteristic of epithelial cells is that, unlike fibroblasts, they do not undergo contact inhibition but continue to proliferate at confluence. This behavior enables the expansion of epithelial tissues during organismal growth without compromising the barrier function created by intercellular junctions. Importantly, however, proliferation is not indefinite but terminates at a preset cell density. Stretching or wounding an epithelial sheet, which reduces the cell density, can reinitiate cell division. Conversely, compression, which increases density, can result in extrusion and apoptosis of cells so as to bring the epithelial layer back to its homeostatic state. This control mechanism that prevents tissue overgrowth is essential for normal development, and it is lost in hyperplasia and in cancer. However, the mechanisms that underlie homeostatic cell density maintenance remain incompletely understood.
One system through which epithelial cells can respond to changes in density is the Hippo pathway and its effectors YAP and TAZ. These transcriptional co-activators are nuclear at low cell density or under conditions of high mechanical strain, but become phosphorylated and are cytoplasmic (or junction-associated) and nonfunctional at high density and/or low strain. Independently of YAP/TAZ, however, the polarity proteins LGL1/2 can also control density-dependent proliferation by inhibiting proteasomal degradation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (CKI) CDKN1B (p27). Loss of LGL1/2 reduces the expression of p27, which is often upregulated at high cell density to arrest proliferation. Numerous studies on Hippo/YAP have demonstrated the complexity of this pathway, and several novel Hippo pathway components have been revealed over the past few years. In addition, as mentioned previously, Hippo-independent mechanisms have also been recently reported, such as the LGL/p27 pathway. It is, therefore, likely that other Hippo pathway components and/or currently unknown Hippo-independent signaling mechanisms exist; however, no strategy has been designed to identify such mechanisms.
With the goal of discovering novel factors that regulate epithelial homeostasis, we developed a powerful new assay based on a fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) approach that we integrated with a genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 sgRNA knockout (KO) screen to select for genes that are essential for cell cycle arrest at high density, but which do not impact proliferation of cells below the threshold for arrest. The screen employs a fluorescence ubiquitination cell cycle indicator (FUCCI) system to mark proliferating cells in S/G2/M phases of cell cycle with a green fluorescent protein, and cells in G1/G0 with a red fluorescent protein. We found that mammary EpH4 epithelial cells robustly arrest in G1 or G0 by 4 days post-confluency. When these cells were transduced with a pooled whole-genome CRISPR KO library, and then sorted 4 days post-confluencyfor cycling cells, we identified several candidate genes that may regulate cell density-dependent proliferation activity. The top hit was Nf2 (also called Merlin), a known tumor suppressor that negatively regulates YAP/TAZ, which validated our approach. A second, unexpected hit was Traf3, a negative regulator of NF-κB signaling, which has never previously been reported to regulate cell density-dependent proliferation. We demonstrate that loss of Traf3 robustly and specifically activates the noncanonical NF-κB pathway. This in turn triggers an innate immune response and cell autonomously drives cell division independently of both YAP/TAZ signaling and CKIs, overriding these classical mechanisms of density-dependent proliferation control and preventing cells at high density from entering quiescence.
Results
A FUCCI-based screen for density-dependent cell cycle arrest
Our goal was to design a screen for the rapid and efficient selection of epithelial cells that continue to proliferate inappropriately at high cell density. For the screen, we needed to identify a cell line that retained epithelial features, including homeostatic density control. We chose the murine EpH4 mammary epithelial cell line for this screen, because EpH4 cells are highly polarized, form confluent epithelial sheets, and, most importantly, we confirmed that they efficiently arrest at high density. We also needed a tool to specifically identify and select cells that maintain proliferative activity at high density. To distinguish cycling from non-cycling cells, we established a stable EpH4 line that expresses ES-FUCCI, which labels cells in G1/G0 with mCherry and cells in S/G2/M with mCitrine (Figure 1A). As expected, the EpH4-FUCCI cells remain proliferative at 1 day post-confluency but very few cells cycle at high density, with only about 1% of cells expressing mCitrine at 4 days post-confluency (Figure 1B, Figure 1—figure supplement 1A).
Proof of principle experiments for the whole-genome screen.
Accumulation of mCitrine+ cells after FACS rounds. (A) Sorting of EpH4-fluorescence ubiquitination cell cycle indicator (FUCCI) cells by fluorescenceactivated cell sorting (FACS). The number of mCitrine+ cells is increased by depletion of p27. (B) p27 mRNA level in p27 KD cells relative to scrambled control cells measured by qPCR. (C) Strategy for proof-of-principle experiments. (D) Enrichment of sh-p27 after first and second round of FACS, compared to sh-p27 content before FACS, measured by qPCR. Histogram shows mean ± 1 s.d. (n = 3 technical repeats). (E) Imaging of EpH4-FUCCI cells at 4 days post-confluency before sorting and after different rounds of FACS. (F) Gating for sorting EpH4-FUCCI cells by FACS. The number of mCitrine+ cells increases after each round of sorting.
sgRNA sequence PCR for next-generation sequencing (NGS) and sequence processing.
(A) Schematic of PCR reactions aimed to amplify sgRNA containing fragments from gDNA (PCR1) and attach Illumina primers (PCR2) for NGS. (B) The agarose gel with DNA amplified from gDNA of control samples and samples after different rounds of sorting (PCR1). (C) An agarose gel with PCR2 products for the third sorting sample with different Illumina primer pairs shown as an example of PCR2 reaction products. (D) The number of lost sgRNA (zero counts) and Gini index in samples before sorting and after different rounds of sorting. (D’) Total number of reads, number of mapped reads, and the fraction of mapped reads in samples before sorting and after different rounds of sorting. (E), (E’) RRA score plots for samples after first and second sorts, respectively. (F), (F’) The list of genes with FDR below 0.25 and more or equal to three sgRNAs enriched compared to control after first and second sorts, respectively.
Whole-genome screening for genes that inhibit proliferation at homeostatic cell density.
(A) Schematic of fluorescence ubiquitination cell cycle indicator (FUCCI) color transitions through cell cycle. (B) EpH4-FUCCI stable cell line grown to 1 and 4 days post-confluency. (C) Whole-genome CRISPR Knock Out screening strategy. (D) Read count distribution for samples before sorting and after different rounds of sorting. Data are logit transformed (f(p) = log2(p/1 - p) where p is the proportion of a given sgRNA in the total number of sgRNAs in a sample). Color coding shows depleted sgRNAs in blue, enriched sgRNAs in red, and sgRNA with no enrichment in white. Gray shows lost sgRNAs. (E) Genes plotted based on their RRA enrichment score (third sorting). (F) List of genes with FDR below 0.25 and ≥3 sgRNAs enriched compared to control after third sort.
We reasoned that the expression of any shRNA or sgRNA that disrupts expression of a gene involved in density-dependent arrest could be identified by employing FACS to enrich for green cells from an EpH4-FUCCI population grown to high density. To test this concept, we used a shRNA lentiviral construct to deplete the CKI p27, which is known to be associated with cell cycle arrest post-confluency. Quantitative PCR for the p27 transcript showed that ~60% of p27 mRNA was lost in cells expressing the p27 shRNA compared to EpH4-FUCCI cells expressing scrambled shRNA (Figure 1—figure supplement 1B). The p27-depleted cells display increased cell proliferation after 4 days post-confluency in contrast to cells expressing scrambled shRNA (Figure 1—figure supplement 1A). As a proof-of-principle experiment, we next mixed wild-type (WT) EpH4-FUCCI cells and sh-p27 EpH4-FUCCI cells at a 10:1 ratio (Figure 1—figure supplement 1C). The mixed cells were then plated at a cell density of 100,000 cells/cm2, such that they reached confluency 24 hr after seeding. We grew the mixture of cells for 4 days post-confluency and sorted mCitrine-positive (mCitrine+) cells by FACS. After sorting, we isolated genomic DNA (gDNA) and performed qPCR using primers against the puromycin gene, located in the lentiviral plasmid insert, to assess the fraction of p27-depleted cells in the cell mixture. We observed an average of 1.4× and 3.5× enrichment of the puromycin gene after the first and second rounds of sorting, respectively (Figure 1—figure supplement 1D). These data support the validity of our screen design.
Based on these encouraging results, we proceeded to developing an EpH4-FUCCI cell line, in which every cell has lost a single gene. We transduced EpH4-FUCCI cells with the pooled GeCKO CRISPR v2 KO lentivirus library (; Figure 1D). The library contains six sgRNAs against each of 20,611 genes, plus 1000 non-targeting controls, for a total of 130,209 sgRNAs. To ensure that our EpH4-FUCCI cells would receive only one sgRNA on average, we transduced cells with viruses at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.3. It is critical to maintain a large enough cell population to ensure that all sgRNAs in the library are retained. Therefore, we aimed to have 150–300 cells per sgRNA in each step of the screen. Based on these values, 6.7 × 107 EpH4-FUCCI cells were transduced to obtain about 2 × 107 cells that had acquired viruses (~150 cells per sgRNA). Cells that were not infected with virus were eliminated by puromycin selection. We plated the cells at 100,000 cells/cm2 and grew them for 4 days post-confluency. To maintain library representation, we sorted 4 × 107 cells (300 cells per sgRNA) by FACS to select mCitrine+ cells. We re-grew cells for the next round of selection and for gDNA isolation. In total, we performed three FAC sorts. We observed a steady increase in the number of mCitrine+ cells after each round of FACS (Figure 1—figure supplement 1E and F). gDNA was purified, and integrated sgRNA cassettes were amplified from the DNA by PCR, as described previously (; Figure 1—figure supplement 2A and B). A second PCR reaction attached Illumina index primers (Figure 1—figure supplement 2A and C), and the pooled product was then sequenced.
We used the MAGeCK program to map sequencing reads to the library (Figure 1E, Figure 1—figure supplement 2D and D’). Read count distribution was relatively uniform in the control (unsorted) sample, with depletion of those sgRNAs that target essential genes. After each round of selection, more sgRNAs were depleted, but a small portion of sgRNAs was highly enriched. We utilized the MAGeCK algorithm to find genes that were enriched after sorts compared to control. MAGeCK takes into account changes in the abundance of all sgRNAs targeting a single gene, measured by the robust ranking aggregation (RRA) score. The most enriched genes have the smallest RRA scores (Figure 1F, Figure 1—figure supplement 2E and E’). We selected genes with FDR below 0.25 and with three or more sgRNAs/gene selected (Figure 1G, Figure 1—figure supplement 2F and F’).
The CRISPR screen identifies a component of the Hippo pathway, a lymphocyte proliferation control factor, and NEDD8-conjugating E2 enzyme
Interestingly, the top enriched target was Nf2/Merlin, which is a known tumor suppressor gene and a regulator of Hippo signaling necessary for cell density control. This hit, the sgRNAs for which were enriched by >1000× above the control abundance, strongly validated our screening strategy. Two unexpected hits were for the Traf3 and Ube2m (Ubс12) genes (Figure 1G), which have not previously been implicated in density-dependent cell cycle arrest.
TRAF3 (TNF receptor associated factor 3) is critical for lymphocyte proliferation control and immune responses. It negatively regulates signaling through multiple pathways, including the canonical and noncanonical NF-κB pathways.
Deletions and mutations of TRAF3 are among the most common genetic alterations in human B cell malignancies. B cell-specific KO of the Traf3 gene in mice leads to increased B cell numbers and spontaneous lymphomas. Myeloid-specific Traf3 KO causes histiocytic sarcomas of macrophage origin. Therefore, TRAF3 is critical for the prevention of malignant growth in blood cells; however, TRAF3 roles in epithelia have not yet been widely investigated, despite its ubiquitous expression in mouse and human tissues.
A third hit from our screen was Ube2m (ubiquitin conjugating enzyme E2 M, also known as Ubc12). UBE2M is a NEDD8 conjugation E2 enzyme, which neddylates CULLIN-RING ligases to stimulate their activity. Interestingly, stress induces UBE2M expression and promotes its ubiquitylation of UBE2F, the degradation of which can suppress cell proliferation.
To confirm that loss of our top candidates indeed results in over-proliferation at high density, we developed two new sgRNA CRISPR v2 plasmids per gene. The sgRNA sequences were different from those in the GeCKO library. We transduced EpH4 cells with these sgRNA lentiviruses and confirmed efficient KO of each gene by immunoblotting for NF2, TRAF3, and UBE2M (Figure 2A–C’). To test if loss of the target genes leads to a failure in cell cycle arrest at high density, we analyzed BrdU incorporation at 1 and 4 days post-confluency. BrdU was added to cells for 1 hr, then cells were fixed and stained. When cells had just reached a confluent state, we found that BrdU incorporation was similar for the non-targeted sgRNA control (NT) and each of the KO cell lines, but that at high density the KO cells incorporated more BrdU than did the NT control cells (Figure 2D). These differences were statistically significant at high density, as determined by cytometric analysis of BrdU+ cells (Figure 2E and F, Figure 2—figure supplement 1A). We also observed that all three KO cell lines formed multiple layers at high density, while control cells remained as a single, uniform layer (Figure 2G and H, Figure 2—figure supplement 1B). Together, these data demonstrate that our screen successfully identified genes that are essential for the restriction of proliferation at high cell density. Importantly, loss of these genes has no effect on the cell cycle at lower densities.
BrdU+ cell cytometry gates and cancer survival based on Traf3 expression level.
(A) Flow cytometry gating for cells stained for BrdU. (B) Control and KO cells stained by phalloidin and Hoechst. Top panel shows xz view. (C) Kaplan–Meier plots show overall survival in all lung and gastric cancer based on Traf3 expression level. Red and black curves reflect patients with high and low Traf3 expression, respectively.
Validation of candidate genes identified from the screen.
(A–C) Immunoblots of NT control and NF2 (A), TRAF3 (B), and UBE2M (C) KO EpH4 cells for NF2, TRAF3, and UBE2M, respectively. α-tubulin or GAPDH was used as a loading control. (A’–C’) Quantification of NF2 (A’), TRAF3 (B’), and UBE2M (C’) levels based on immunoblotting in (A–C). (A’C’) Histograms show mean ± 1 s.d. (n = 3). p-values were calculated by one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. (D) NT control, NF2, TRAF3, and UBE2M KO cells grown for 1 or 4 days post-confluency. BrdU was added for 1 hr, and then cells were fixed and stained for BrdU, with DAPI as a nuclear marker. (E and F) Cytometric analysis of NT control, NF2, TRAF3, and UBE2M KO cells stained for BrdU to assess proliferation at 1 or 4 DPC, respectively. n = 4 (E) and n = 6 (F), histograms show mean ± 1 s.d. p-values were calculated by one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. (G) Control and KO cells stained with Hoechst dye. Confocal images are depth color coded. The color code scale is shown below. (H) Five fields of view in four biological repeats were used to quantify the level of multilayering. Data shown as a SuperPlot. p-values were calculated by mixed model two-way ANOVA.
TRAF3 suppresses proliferation of mammary organoids, human mammary epithelial cells, and fibroblasts
Little is known about the function of TRAF3 in epithelial cells, and its role in density-dependent cell cycle arrest has not been previously investigated. Interestingly, however, genetic alterations in Traf3 occur in a variety of human epithelial cancers, though at a level of <6%. Low Traf3 mRNA expression is also associated with significantly worse survival for lung and gastric cancer patients (Figure 2—figure supplement 1C). Therefore, we focused on this gene for further analysis.
To determine the generality of the phenotype induced by deletion of Traf3, we first asked if the effects are confined to the EpH4 mammary epithelial line or are also important in primary mammary tissue. To address this question, we used murine mammary organoids, which recapitulate many aspects of normal morphogenesis of the mammary gland. Mammary gland ductal fragments were isolated from WT C3H mice, transduced with lentivirus, and then grown as organoids in Matrigel culture, as described previously (; Figure 3A). As shown in Figure 3B, WT organoids form buds with hollow lumens, but organoids lacking TRAF3 formed multilayered buds with small or no detectable lumens. Additionally, staining for phospho-HISTONE H3 revealed a substantially higher mitotic index in organoids deleted for Traf3, compared to organoids transduced with a control sgRNA (Figure 3B and C), demonstrating that TRAF3 normally suppresses WT tissue overgrowth.
Loss of TRAF3 in MCF10a and NIH 3T3 cells causes over-proliferation.
(A) Immunoblotting of NT and TRAF3 KO MCF10a cells for TRAF3. GAPDH was used as a loading control. (A’) Quantifications of TRAF3 levels based on western blots (A) Histogram shows mean ± 1 s.d. (n = 3). p-values were calculated by one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. (B) Cytometric analysis of NT control and TRAF3 KO MCF10a cells stained for BrdU to assess proliferation at 5 days post-confluency. Histogram shows mean ± 1 s.d.(n = 3). p-values were calculated by one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. (B’) NT control and TRAF3 KO MCF10a cells at 5 days post-confluency were treated and stained for BrdU and DAPI as nuclear marker. (C) Immunoblotting of NT and TRAF3 KO NIH 3T3 cells for TRAF3. Actin was used as a loading control. (C’) Quantifications of TRAF3 levels based on western blots (C) Histogram shows mean ± 1 s.d. (n = 3). p-values were calculated by Student’s t-test. (D) Cytometric analysis of NT control and TRAF3 KO NIH 3T3 cells stained for BrdU to assess proliferation at 4 days post-confluency. Histogram shows mean ± 1 s.d. (n = 3). p-values were calculated by Student’s t-test. (D’) NT control and TRAF3 KO NIH 3T3 cells at 4 days post-confluency were treated and stained for BrdU and DAPI as nuclear marker.
Loss of TRAF3 causes over-proliferation in primary mammary organoids.
(A) Primary mammary organoid experiment workflow. (B) Maximum intensity projection of NT and TRAF3 KO1 mammary organoids stained for phospho-HISTONE H3 (pH3), E-CADHERIN, and DNA (Hoechst). Bottom panel – single confocal plane of NT and TRAF3 KO1 organoids. (C) Quantifications of the number of pH3-positive cells per organoid; 5–10 organoids of comparable size were quantified per condition per repeat. Data shown as a SuperPlot (n = 3). p-values were calculated by mixed model two-way ANOVA.
To extend our analysis across species, we transduced the normal human mammary gland cell line MCF10A with sgRNAs designed to target human Traf3. Loss of the gene product was confirmed by immunoblotting (Figure 3—figure supplement 1A and A′). We assessed cell proliferation by immunofluorescence and cytometric analysis of BrdU incorporation as described above, and found that, similar to EpH4 cells, MCF10a TRAF3 KO cells, but not WT MCF10a cells, over-proliferate at high density (Figure 3—figure supplement 1B and B′).
Finally, we determined if this role for TRAF3 is confined to epithelial cells by knocking out the gene in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. Normally, these cells contact-inhibit at high density. CRISPR KO of Traf3 (confirmed by western blotting (Figure 3—figure supplement 1D and D’)) promoted cell proliferation at high density as measured by cytometric analysis of BrdU staining (Figure 3—figure supplement 1D and D’). These data suggest that loss of TRAF3 broadly interferes with cell cycle arrest including cells of epithelial and mesenchymal lineages.
Loss of TRAF3 activates noncanonical NF-κB signaling to promote over-proliferation
How does TRAF3 regulate proliferation? We hypothesized that TRAF3 might be involved in the same pathways as in blood cells, where it negatively regulates both the canonical and noncanonical NF-κB pathways. In the noncanonical pathway, TRAF3 constitutively promotes proteasomal degradation of MAP3K14 (NIK), a kinase that is essential for activation of the downstream signaling cascade. Ligand recruitment to an upstream receptor triggers TRAF3 poly-ubiquitinylation and degradation. As a result, NIK levels increase, and it phosphorylates its downstream target IKKα, which in turn phosphorylates NFKB2 (p100). Phosphorylated p100 is partially degraded to p52, which enters the nucleus in association with RELB and regulates the transcription of target genes.
To test if loss of TRAF3 activates noncanonical NF-κB signaling, we examined the location of RELB in control and TRAF3 KO EpH4 cells and primary mammary gland organoids (Figure 4A–C). As expected, RELB was predominantly cytoplasmic in control cells and organoids. However, loss of TRAF3 caused a substantial nuclear accumulation, indicative of noncanonical NF-κB activation. We also performed immunoblotting for noncanonical NF-κB signaling components in control and TRAF3 KO cells at 1 and 4 days post-confluency (Figure 4D and E). TRAF3 KO cells at both 1 and 4 days post-confluency had substantially increased NIK levels and enhanced processing of p100 to p52 compared to NT control cells. However, cell density differences had no impact on NIK, RELB, TRAF3, and p100/p52 protein levels. Therefore, TRAF3 KO leads to activation of noncanonical NF-κB signaling, but regulation of these pathway components is independent of cell density.
Loss of TRAF3 specifically activates noncanonical but not canonical NF-κB pathway.
(A) Simplified schematic of noncanonical NF-κB pathway. TRAF3 sends NIK for degradation. In the absence of TRAF3, NIK levels increase, and it activates the downstream cascade, resulting in increased p100 processing to p52. RELB/p52 enters the nucleus where it regulates transcription of target genes. In experiments (B) and (C) RELB localization was tested in NT and TRAF3 KO1 cells. (B and C) Fluorescence staining of NT and TRAF3 KO1 EpH4 cells (B) and organoids (C) with anti-RELB antibodies and DAPI. (B) Single confocal planes. (C) Maximum intensity projection. White boxed ROIs are shown in enlarged images as single confocal planes. (D) Immunoblots of NT and TRAF3 KO1 lysates grown to 1 or 4 days post-confluency probed for NIK, RELB, TRAF3, and actin as loading control. (E) Immunoblots of NT and TRAF3 KO1 lysates grown to 1 or 4 days post-confluency probed for p100/p52 and α-tubulin as loading control. (F) A schematic of TRAF3-dependent activation of canonical NF-κB pathway. (G) Fluorescence staining of NT and TRAF3 KO1 cells with antibodies against p65 and with DAPI. (H) Western blotting of NT and TRAF3 KO1 cells at 1 and 4 days post-confluency probed for components of canonical NF-κB pathway and GAPDH as loading control.
Based on previous literature, we predicted that loss of TRAF3 could also stimulate canonical NF-κB signaling (Figure 4F). IκB normally blocks RELA/p65 and p50 from entering the nucleus, but activation of upstream kinases IKKα/β by phosphorylation induces IκB phosphorylation and degradation. Surprisingly, however, RELA/p65 did not accumulate in the nuclei of TRAF3 KO cells (Figure 4G). Immunoblotting for the canonical NF-κB pathway components showed activation of IKKα/β phosphorylation at high density in both control and TRAF3 KO cells, but no IκB degradation was observed in control and TRAF3 KO cells either at low or at high density (Figure 4H). Together, these data demonstrate that in mammary epithelial cells, the loss of TRAF3 specifically activates noncanonical but not canonical NF-κB signaling.
If TRAF3 affects cell proliferation via the noncanonical NF-κB pathway, then deletion of p100 in TRAF3 KO cells should reduce proliferation to control levels (Figure 5A). To test this prediction, we generated a lentivector encoding a p100 sgRNA, plus GFP as a selection marker. We transduced EpH4 cells with virus and isolated GFP+ cells by FACS. Immunoblotting confirmed efficient KO of p100 in NT control and TRAF3 KO cells (Figure 5B and B’). Blotting also showed increased cleavage of p100 to p52 in TRAF3 KO cells as compared to control cells (Figure 5B), and both bands were lost in cells expressing the p100 sgRNA, confirming that the detected 52 kDa band is indeed the product of p100. We next grew cells to high density and analyzed pulsed BrdU incorporation by flow cytometry. There was no significant difference between control and NT/p100 KO cells, indicating that TRAF3 does not regulate cell cycling at low cell density. The proliferation of TRAF3/p100 double KO cells was, however, substantially reduced compared to TRAF3 KO cells (Figure 5C and D) demonstrating that noncanonical NF-κB signaling is required for the phenotype induced by loss of TRAF3.
Noncanonical NF-κB signaling is necessary and sufficient for over-proliferation in TRAF3 KO cells.
(A) Noncanonical NF-κB pathway schematic. Proteins shown in bold were manipulated in this study. (B) Immunoblotting of NT and TRAF3 KO1 cells transduced with pLVTHM GFP NT or p100 sgRNAs. Blot was stained for p100/p52, TRAF3, and GAPDH (loading control). (B′) Quantifications of western blot (B). Histogram shows mean ± 1 s.d. (n = 3). p-values were calculated by Student’s t-test. (C) Cytometric analysis of NT and TRAF3 KO cells transduced with pLVTHM GFP NT or p100 sgRNAs. Graph shows mean ± s.d. (n = 4). p-values were calculated by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (D) NT and TRAF3 KO1 cells transduced with pLVTHM GFP NT or p100 sgRNAs were treated with BrdU at 4 days post-confluency and immunostained for BrdU and DAPI. (E) Immunoblot of NT and TRAF3 KO1 cells transduced with NT, NIK KO1 or KO2. Blot was stained for NIK, TRAF3, and GAPDH (loading control). (E’) Quantifications of western blot (E). Histogram shows mean ± 1 s.d (n = 3). p-values were calculated by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (F) Cytometric analysis of NT cells and TRAF3 KO1 cells transduced with control NT, NIK KO1 and KO2. Histogram shows mean ± 1 s.d. (n = 5). p-values were calculated by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (G) NT and TRAF3 KO1 cells transduced with control NT, NIK KO1 and KO2 were treated with BrdU at 4 days post-confluency and immunostained for BrdU and DAPI. (H and I) Cytometric analysis of NT and TRAF3 KO cells treated with 7 µM BV6 at low (H) and high (I) density. Histogram shows mean ± 1 s.d. (n = 5 (H), n = 6 (I)). p-values were calculated by one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s (H) or Tukey’s (I) multiple comparisons test. (J) Immunoblot of NT, TRAF3 KO1 (positive control), and NT cells expressing pWPI mScarlet NIK-ΔT3. Blot was stained for NIK and GAPDH (loading control). (K) Cytometric analysis of NT cells and NT pWPI mScarlet NIK-ΔT3 cells. Histogram shows mean ± 1 s.d. (n = 6). p-values were calculated by Student’s t-test. (L) NT and NT pWPI mScarlet NIK-ΔT3 cells were treated with BrdU at 4 days post-confluency and immunostained for BrdU and DAPI.
As a further test, we knocked out the effector kinase NIK. Immunoblotting (Figure 5E and E’) revealed that, as expected, NIK is undetectable in NT control cells, but accumulates in TRAF3 KO cells. However, expression was lost in TRAF3/NIK double KO cells. Similar to p100 KO, deletion of NIK caused reduced proliferation in TRAF3 KO cells (Figure 5F and G).
To further confirm that noncanonical NF-κB pathway is necessary for the high density over-proliferation phenotype, we treated cells with BV6, a selective inhibitor of IAP proteins. cIAP1/2 is a part of the TRAF3 complex that degrades NIK. Therefore, we predicted that treatment with BV6 would induce over-proliferation. We treated cells with BV6 at low and high density (Figure 5H and I, respectively) and observed that BV6 treatment induces over-proliferation of NT cells at high density but not at low density, as shown by cytometric analysis of BrdU staining (Figure 5H and I).
We next asked if the noncanonical NF-κB pathway is sufficient to induce over-proliferation. We cloned and overexpressed a mutant NIK protein lacking the TRAF3-binding motif (NIK-ΔT3) to prevent NIK degradation (Figure 5J). Flow cytometry and immunofluorescent staining showed strong over-proliferation of NT NIK-ΔT3 cells at 4 days post-confluency compared to NT control cells (Figure 5K and L) demonstrating that activation of noncanonical NF-κB pathway is sufficient for increased proliferation at high density.
We conclude that TRAF3 normally suppresses proliferation at high cell density via inhibition of the noncanonical NF-κB pathway but does not impact proliferation at lower cell density. This pathway does not contribute to proliferation in WT EpH4 cells but is constitutively activated by loss of TRAF3. Activation of noncanonical NF-κB pathway downstream of TRAF3 is both necessary and sufficient for over-proliferation phenotype at high density.
Noncanonical NF-κB signaling activates an innate immune response
Our data show that the loss of TRAF3 results in increased levels of the transcription factor p52, which is necessary for over-proliferation. However, gene expression changes downstream of noncanonical NF-κB signaling have not been investigated in epithelia, nor is it known which genes are targets of p52 in epithelial cells. Therefore, to identify downstream effectors of TRAF3 and noncanonical NF-κB signaling, we performed genome-wide transcriptomics analysis on NT control cells, TRAF3 KO, and TRAF3/p100 double KO cells. For these studies, we used our EpH4-FUCCI mammary epithelial cell line, which was transduced with NT, Traf3, or Traf3 plus p100 sgRNA lentiviruses, and sorted for G1/G0 phase (mCherry+) cells (Figure 6A). This strategy eliminates indirect gene expression differences reflective of the larger fraction of cycling (mCitrine+) cells caused by loss of TRAF3 but will not remove constitutive changes in gene expression.
Loss of TRAF3 in EpH4 cells induces immune response pathways.
(A) RNAseq experiment workflow. (B) Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) of RNAseq data showing significant upregulation of pathways related to infection response in TRAF3 KO cells compared to NT control (top, pink bars), and significant reduction of these pathways in TRAF3/p100 double KO cells compared to TRAF3 KO cells (bottom, blue bars). Notably, Hippo signaling and other pathways that regulate proliferation were unchanged. Threshold line is p<0.05. (C–H) Heatmaps comparing mRNA levels of antigen presentation (C), interferon (D), foreign RNA and DNA recognition (E) pathway components, adhesion molecules (F), NADPH-oxidase components (G), and chemokines and growth factors (H) between NT, TRAF3 KO1, and TRAF3/p100 double KO in two experimental repeats. NT, TRAF3 KO1, and TRAF3/p100 double KO are color coded with green, purple, and light blue, respectively. Data are presented as log2 of transcripts per million (TPM).
Two biological replicates of each cell line were processed, and fastq files were analyzed using CLC Genomics Workbench and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Differential gene expression was filtered for greater than twofold differences, FDR < 0.05. Surprisingly, IPA did not detect any stimulation by TRAF3 KO of those signaling pathways classically involved in proliferation, including PI3K/AKT, JNK, TGF-β, WNT, and Hippo (Figure 6B). There was, however, a dramatic induction of innate immune response genes. Antigen presentation, interferon response genes, and genes responsible for foreign DNA and RNA recognition were strongly upregulated by deletion of TRAF3 (Figure 6B–E). Additionally, TRAF3 KO cells overexpress adhesion molecules Icam1 and Vcam1 that facilitate adhesion of recruited leukocytes (Figure 6F). Superoxide-producing NADPH-oxidase complex genes, which eliminate bacteria and fungi, were also induced (Figure 6G), as were several chemokines and growth factors (Figure 6H), but some genes that normally respond to pathogens, such as defensins, IL-8, and IL-17, were not affected.
The comparison of TRAF3 KO and TRAF3/p100 double KO samples revealed that not all pathways activated by TRAF3 KO could be reversed by blocking noncanonical NF-κB signaling. We found that p100 KO partially reduces antigen presentation gene expression, the interferon response pathway, and foreign DNA and RNA recognition genes (Figure 6B–E), but differential gene expression of other pathways was not significantly changed. These data argue that antigen presentation, interferon pathways, and foreign DNA and RNA recognition genes are downstream targets of noncanonical NF-κB signaling in mammary epithelial cells. However, none of these pathways is likely to promote cell proliferation. Rather, the data suggest that noncanonical NF-κB signaling instead suppresses signals that normally would cause cell cycle exit.
Loss of TRAF3 does not affect YAP signaling
Hippo/YAP signaling is a key mechanism that prevents abnormal proliferation at high density. Therefore, we tested whether the response to deletion of TRAF3 is independent of this pathway. The transcriptional co-activator YAP, a downstream effector of Hippo, is nuclear at low cell density and promotes cell cycling, but becomes phosphorylated and is cytoplasmic at high density. Therefore, we asked if loss of TRAF3 induces YAP translocation to the nucleus. We immunostained control, NF2 KO cells (positive control) and TRAF3 KO cells with anti-YAP antibodies. In dense cultures, YAP was predominantly cytoplasmic in the NT control cells, but nuclear in NF2 KO cells, as expected. However, deletion of TRAF3 did not induce significant nuclear accumulation of YAP, as compared to the NT control (Figure 7A and B). Moreover, comparison of expression profiles for conserved YAP target genes from our RNAseq data showed an absence of any significant induction for more than 90% of conserved YAP target genes in TRAF3 KO cells compared to the NT control (Figure 7C). We conclude, therefore, that TRAF3 loss promotes over-proliferation independently of YAP, a major regulator of cell density-dependent proliferation.
TRAF3 KO cells over-proliferate cell autonomously.
(A) NT and TRAF3 KO1 cells labeled with GFP or mScarlet were mixed at a 1:1 ratio (NT GFP + NT mScarlet, NT GFP + TRAF3 KO1 mScarlet) and grown to 4 days post-confluency. Cells were stained for KI-67 and DAPI. (B) Quantifications of NT GFP cell proliferation in mixture with NT mScarlet or TRAF3 KO1 mScarlet. Proliferation was measured as percent of KI-67-positive cells to the total number of NT GFP cells. Data are presented as a SuperPlot (n = 3). p-value was calculated by mixed model two-way ANOVA.
Loss of Traf3 does not affect CKI levels.
(A) Immunoblotting for p21 in sparse NT cells, dense NT, TRAF3 KO1, NT/p100 KO, and TRAF3/p100 double KO cells. GAPDH was used as a loading control. (B) Western blotting for p27 and p18 in sparse NT cells, dense NT, TRAF3 KO1, NT/p100 KO, and TRAF3/p100 double KO cells. GAPDH was used as a loading control. (C) Western blotting for p19 in sparse NT cells, dense NT, TRAF3 KO1, NT/p100 KO, and TRAF3/p100 double KO cells. GAPDH was used as a loading control. (A’–C’) Quantifications of the blots (A–C). n = 4 for blots (A and B). n = 3 for blot (C). Histograms show mean ± 1 s.d. p-values were calculated by one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test.
YAP/TAZ signaling is not activated by loss of TRAF3.
(A) NT, NF2 KO1, and TRAF3 KO1 cells stained for YAP and DAPI. (B) Quantifications of nuclear to cytoplasmic YAP ratio in NT, NF2 KO1, and TRAF3 KO1 cells. Measurements were of at least 12 fields of view per condition per experimental replicate, and the average ratio was calculated. Data are presented as a SuperPlot (n = 3). p-values were calculated by mixed model two-way ANOVA. (C) Conserved YAP/TAZ gene signature expression in TRAF3 KO1 cells shown as fold differences between NT control and TRAF3 KO1. Dashed threshold line is based on 2× increase in gene expression.
The TRAF3 KO cell over-proliferation phenotype is cell autonomous
Our RNAseq data showed that several secreted factors including chemokines and growth factors (Figure 6H) are induced by loss of TRAF3, and we hypothesized that these factors might be secreted and trigger over-proliferation at high density in neighboring cells. To test this possibility, we labeled NT control cells with GFP and, separately, control or TRAF3 KO cells with mScarlet, then mixed red and green cells (NT + TRAF3 KO, or NT + NT) at a 1:1 ratio, and after 4 days post-confluency stained them for the proliferation marker KI-67 and DAPI (Figure 7—figure supplement 1A). Cytokines released from the TRAF3 KO cells could then, in principle, stimulate proliferation of surrounding NT (GFP+) control cells. However, there was no significant difference in the fraction of KI-67+ cells between NT GFP cells mixed with NT mScarlet and NT GFP cells mixed with TRAF3 KO mScarlet cells (Figure 7—figure supplement 1B). These data strongly argue that the over-proliferation phenotype is cell autonomous and is not a consequence of secreted cytokines or other factors.
Loss of TRAF3 does not affect the levels of CKIs
The p27 CKI has been reported to inhibit density-dependent proliferation in response to changes in LGL1/2 expression. Moreover, we demonstrated that shRNA knockdown of p27 can promote cell proliferation in EpH4 cells (Figure 1B and C, Figure 1—figure supplement 1A and B). Therefore, we asked if the noncanonical NF-κB pathway suppresses CKI induction at high cell density. We immunoblotted for p27 and other CKIs including CDKN1A (p21), CDKN2C (p18), and CDKN2D (p19), in subconfluent and dense cultures (4 days post-confluency) of NT, NT/p100 KO, TRAF3 KO1, and TRAF3/p100 double KO cells (Figure 7—figure supplement 2A–C). p21 levels were low in cells at low density, but were high in all dense cultures, irrespective of TRAF3 or p100 expression. No significant changes in any of the other CKIs we tested were detected at low versus high cell density, or in the absence of TRAF3 or p100 (Figure 7—figure supplement 2A'–C'). These data argue that noncanonical NF-κB signaling overrides the ability of these CKIs to induce cell cycle arrest in EpH4 cells.
Loss of TRAF3 blocks cells from entering G0
It was previously shown that TRAF3 induces over-proliferation by triggering CYCLIN D1 expression. We analyzed CYCLIN D1 in dense TRAF3 KO cells compared to NT cells by immunofluorescence. Indeed, we observed a small increase in CYCLIN D1 levels in TRAF3 KO cells compared to control (Figure 8A and B).
Loss of TRAF3 prevents cells from entering G0.
(A) NT and TRAF3 KO1 cells stained for CYCLIN D1 and DAPI. (B) Quantifications of CYCLIN D1 positive cells in NT and TRAF3 KO cells. Data are presented as a SuperPlot (n = 3). p-value was calculated by mixed model two-way ANOVA. (C) NT and TRAF3 KO1 cells grown for 24 hr in regular media or media without FBS (starved) were treated with BrdU and analyzed by flow cytometry. (D) A schematic of DHB-mVenus and phospho-RB S807/811 localization at different phases of cell cycle. (E) NT and TRAF3 KO1 cells stably expressing DHB-mVenus were grown to 4 days post-confluency and stained for phospho-RB S807/811 and DAPI. (F) Quantifications of cells with non-nuclear DHB-mVenus localization. Data are presented as a SuperPlot (n = 4). p-value was calculated by mixed model two-way ANOVA. (G) Quantification of phospho-RB positive cells. Data are presented as a SuperPlot (n = 4). p-value was calculated by mixed model two-way ANOVA.
We hypothesized that loss of TRAF3 prevents cells from entering the G0 quiescent state. Through this mechanism loss of TRAF3 should give a proliferative advantage to cells not only at high density but also under other challenging conditions, such as starvation, that also promote entry into G0. To test this idea, we grew NT and TRAF3 KO cells in normal medium or medium devoid of FBS (Figure 8C). We observed no difference in proliferation between NT and TRAF3 KO cells in normal medium after 1 day post-confluency. However, starvation decreased proliferation in control cells but not in TRAF3 KO cells. These data suggest that loss of TRAF3 prevents cells from entering G0.
To further explore this possibility, we labeled control and TRAF3 KO cells with markers to differentiate quiescent and cycling cells. Cells exiting the cell cycle and entering G0 are known to have very low CDK2 activity. To determine if loss of TRAF3 prevents entry into G0, we used a previously validated biosensor, DHB-mVenus, which can quantitatively reveal CDK2 activity in live cells based on its distribution between the nucleus (G0/G1) and cytoplasm (G2/M) (Figure 8D). As shown in Figure 8E and F, at high density control cells enter quiescence, with almost exclusive nuclear localization of the biosensor. In contrast, cells lacking TRAF3 show an increased percent of cytoplasmic DHB-mVenus localization at high density, consistent with them continuing in cycle instead of entering quiescence.
Finally, we stained the cells for phospho-RB (Ser807/811). The retinoblastoma protein is a central regulator of the cell cycle and becomes dephosphorylated in G0, but is progressively phosphorylated and inactivated as cells leave G0 and move through G1 into S phase (Figure 8D). RB phosphorylation was very low in NT control at high density but loss of TRAF3 induced a dramatic increase in phospho-RB positive cells (Figure 8E and G). Together, these data strongly argue that the key effect of loss of TRAF3 is a failure to enter G0 under conditions that normally promote quiescence.
Discussion
Epithelial cells possess intrinsic mechanisms to achieve and maintain an appropriate cell density, which is essential for normal tissue morphogenesis and maintenance. Mechanisms of homeostatic cell density establishment are not fully understood. One of the most recognized pathways controlling cell density-dependent proliferation is the Hippo/YAP signaling pathway. However, there are other mechanisms that control cell density independently from Hippo/YAP; for instance, LGL1/2 controls p27 levels in a density-dependent manner. With the goal of identifying novel components that control homeostatic cell density, we used an unbiased genome-wide CRISPR KO screen, in which we selected for cells that over-proliferate at high density. We uncovered a known (NF2) and two novel (TRAF3 and UBE2M) regulators of epithelial cell density. Loss of any of these genes results in increased cell proliferation at high density and multilayering of cells; however, proliferation at low cell density remains unaltered.
TRAF3 was of particular interest because this protein is essential for blood cell expansion and regulation of the immune response, but its functions in other tissues still remain unclear, although it is ubiquitously expressed. We discovered that loss of TRAF3 results in cell overgrowth in both mouse and human mammary gland cell lines, and mesenchymal cells (NIH 3T3 fibroblasts) as well as in primary mouse mammary gland organoids. We interrogated the mechanism of TRAF3-dependent proliferation control in mammary gland epithelial cells (Figure 9) and found that loss of TRAF3 specifically activates the noncanonical branch of NF-κB signaling, while having no effect on canonical NF-κB signaling. We further discovered that the noncanonical pathway is necessary for over-proliferation at high density in cells lacking TRAF3.
Model for the role of TRAF3 in density-dependent proliferation.
Cells at high density rarely proliferate (on the left). They have active Hippo signaling (YAP is cytoplasmic), inactive canonical NF-κB (p65/p50 is cytoplasmic) and inactive noncanonical NF-κB signaling (NIK is low, p100 is not processed to p52, and RELB is cytoplasmic). Upon loss of TRAF3, Hippo and canonical NF-κB signaling remain unaltered, but noncanonical NF-κB signaling is activated (on the right). NIK levels rise in the absence of TRAF3, activates the downstream cascade, resulting in increased p100 processing to p52. The RELB/p52 complex activates innate immune response genes, including antigen presentation and interferon pathway components. It also overrides CKIs, induces CYCLIN D1 expression, and prevents entering G0 as shown by increased number of cells with active CDK2 and phosphorylated RB. Altogether it results in cell over-proliferation at high density.
Our RNAseq data revealed that loss of TRAF3 does not induce the transcription of classical proliferation pathway components, including YAP/TAZ, PI3K/AKT, MAPK, TGF-β, and WNT signaling. We also demonstrated that over-proliferation caused by loss of TRAF3 is cell autonomous, as control cells did not over-proliferate when co-cultured with TRAF3 KO cells. Together, these data suggest that noncanonical NF-κB signaling does not positively drive proliferation but instead suppresses the ability of cells to exit the cell cycle. One key exit mechanism operates through induction of CKIs. For instance, in some epithelial cells p27 levels increase with density and high levels of p27 inhibit cell proliferation. However, we found no differences in levels of p27 or other CKIs (p21, p19, and p18) in cells lacking TRAF3 versus control EpH4 cells, although p21 levels do increase with increased cell density. Therefore, either EpH4 cells do not respond to CKIs or constitutive activation of the noncanonical NF-κB pathway overrides CKI-mediated cell cycle exit. Nonetheless, our data demonstrate that loss of TRAF3 prevents cells from entering quiescent state G0 as shown by increased CDK2 activity and RB phosphorylation.
RNAseq analysis revealed that loss of TRAF3 leads to the activation of immune response pathways, at least in part through noncanonical NF-κB signaling. Activated genes include antigen presentation, interferon response pathways, and genes responsible for foreign DNA and RNA recognition. Expression of these genes was reduced when p100 was deleted in theTRAF3 KO cells. However, certain genes induced in the TRAF3 KO cells, including adhesion molecules, superoxide-producing enzymes, and chemokines, were not reduced by deletion of p100. These data reveal that a mechanism independent of noncanonical NF-κB signaling can drive gene expression responses activated by loss of TRAF3.
The literature suggests that the loss or reduction of Traf3 expression or activation of noncanonical NF-κB signaling might be important for hyperplasia in response to infection or contribute to cancer development. It is known that epithelial cells can respond to infection by mounting an innate immune response. The noncanonical NF-κB pathway can be activated by contact with pathogens, and bronchial, intestinal, and mammary gland epithelia can each express a variety of innate immune factors that protect the organisms against infectious agents and attract immune cells. Helicobacter pylori, a bacterium associated with the development of gastritis and gastric cancer, activates noncanonical NF-κB signaling in a stomach epithelial cell line and in H. pylori-associated gastritis. Moreover, activation of the noncanonical NF-κB pathway in response to infection correlates with hyperplasia of the ear mucosa following otitis infection, although the mechanism was not investigated.
As discussed above, Traf3 is mutated, though at low frequency, in different cancers of epithelial origin, and low expression is associated with worse outcomes. Noncanonical NF-κB signaling is also associated with different epithelial cancers, including breast cancer and lung cancer. Further work will be required to determine the impact of this pathway in cancer development.
Materials and methods
Reagent type (species) or resource	Designation	Source or reference	Identifiers	Additional information	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	GeCKO v2 KO Pooled Library	, PMID:25075903; Addgene	CAT: 1000000052		 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	Scrambled control shRNA	Sigma MISSION shRNA library	CAT: SHC016-1EA		 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	The p27 shRNA	Sigma MISSION shRNA library	CAT: TRCN0000287390		 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	p27-qPCR-FWD primer	This paper	N/A	TCAAACGTGAGAGTGTCTAACG	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	p27-qPCR-REV primer	This paper	N/A	CCGGGCCGAAGAGATTTCTG	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	Puromycin-qPCR-FWD primer	This paper	N/A	CTGCAAGAACTCTTCCTCACG	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	Puromycin-qPCR-REV primer	This paper	N/A	GGGAACCGCTCAACTCGG	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	Control non-targeting (NT) sgRNA	This paper	N/A	GCGAGGTATTCGGCTCCGCG	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	Nf2 sgRNA KO1	This paper	N/A	CGAGATGGAGTTCAACTGCG	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	Nf2 sgRNA KO2	This paper	N/A	ATACTGCAGTCCAAAGAACC	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	Traf3 sgRNA KO1	This paper	N/A	GTGCTCGTGCCGGAGCAAGG	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	Traf3 sgRNA KO2	This paper	N/A	TGGCCCTTCAGGTCTACTGT	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	Ube2m sgRNA KO1	This paper	N/A	GCGCAGCTCCGGATTCAGAA	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	Ube2m sgRNA KO2	This paper	N/A	GAGTCGGCCGGCGGCACCAA	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	Nfkb2/p100 sgRNA KO1	This paper	N/A	CTGAGCGTGATAAATGACGT	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	Nfkb2/p100 sgRNA KO2	This paper	N/A	CTGTTCCACAATCACCAGAT	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	Map3k14/NIK sgRNA KO1	This paper	N/A	TCAGAGCGCATTTTCATCGC	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	Map3k14/NIK sgRNA KO2	This paper	N/A	GTCGAGGCAGTACCGGTCGC	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Homo sapiens)	Traf3 sgRNA KO1	This paper	N/A	AGATTCGCGACTACAAGCGG	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Homo sapiens)	Traf3 sgRNA KO2	This paper	N/A	CCTCACATGTTTGCTCTCGC	 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Homo sapiens)	DHB-mVenus	, PMID:24075009; Addgene	CAT: 136461, RRID:Addgene_136461		 	Recombinant DNA reagent (synthetic)	ES-FUCCI	, PMID:25909630; Addgene	CAT: 62451, RRID:Addgene_62451		 	Recombinant DNA reagent (Mus musculus)	pWPI mScarlet NIK-ΔT3	This paper	N/A	Mouse NIK with deleted TRAF3 binding motif (amino acids 78–84) cloned into pWPI-mScarlet vector	 	Antibody	Anti-NF2/MERLIN (rabbit monoclonal)	CST	CAT: 6995S, RRID:AB_10828709	(1:750), WB	 	Antibody	Anti-TRAF3 (mouse monoclonal)	Santa Cruz	CAT: sc-6933, RRID:AB_628390	(1:200), WB	 	Antibody	Anti-UBE2M (rabbit polyclonal)	Proteintech	CAT: 14520–1-AP	(1:500), WB	 	Antibody	Anti-NF-κB2 p100/p52 (rabbit polyclonal)	CST	CAT: 4882, RRID:AB_10695537	(1:750), WB	 	Antibody	Anti-NIK (rabbit polyclonal)	CST	CAT: 4994S, RRID:AB_2297422	(1:500), WB	 	Antibody	Anti-RELB (rabbit monoclonal)	Abcam	CAT: ab180127	(1:1000), WB; (1:300), IF	 	Antibody	Anti-NF-kappaB Pathway Sampler Kit Antibody	CST	CAT: 9936, RRID:AB_561197	(1:1000), WB	 	Antibody	Anti-CDKN1B/p27 (rabbit polyclonal)	BD Transduction Laboratories	CAT: 610241, RRID:AB_610241	(1:1000), WB	 	Antibody	Anti-p21 (mouse monoclonal)	Invitrogen	CAT: ma5-14353, RRID:AB_10986834	(1:1000), WB	 	Antibody	Anti-p19 (rabbit polyclonal)	Santa Cruz	CAT: sc-1063, RRID:AB_2078865	(1:200), WB	 	Antibody	Anti-p18 (rabbit polyclonal)	Santa Cruz	CAT: sc-1064, RRID:AB_2078729	(1:200), WB	 	Antibody	Anti-GAPDH (rabbit monoclonal)	CST	CAT: 2118S, RRID:AB_561053	(1:2000), WB	 	Antibody	Anti-α-tubulin (mouse monoclonal)	Sigma-Aldrich	CAT: T-9026, RRID:AB_477593	(1:4000), WB	 	Antibody	Anti-actin (mouse monoclonal)	Sigma-Aldrich	CAT: A4700, RRID:AB_476730	(1:4000), WB	 	Antibody	Anti-BrdU antibodies (rat monoclonal)	Abcam	CAT: ab6326, RRID:AB_305426	(1:800), IF, Flow	 	Antibody	Anti-YAP (rabbit polyclonal)	Novus Biologicals	CAT: NB110-58358, RRID:AB_922796	(1:200), IF	 	Antibody	Anti-phospho-RB Ser807/811 (rabbit monoclonal)	CST	CAT: 8516S, RRID:AB_11178658	(1:1000), IF	 	Antibody	Anti-CYCLIN D1 (mouse monoclonal)	Invitrogen	CAT: MA5-11387, RRID:AB_10987096	(1:50), IF	 	Antibody	Anti-KI-67 (rabbit polyclonal)	Invitrogen	CAT: 18-0191Z, RRID:AB_86661	1:70, IF	 	Antibody	Anti-Phospho-HISTONE H3 (Ser10) (mouse monoclonal)	CST	CAT: 9706S, RRID:AB_331748	1:300, IF	 	Antibody	Anti-E-CADHERIN (rat monoclonal)	Thermo Fisher Scientific	CAT: 14-3249-80, RRID:AB_1210459	1:500, IF	 	Others	Hoechst 33342 Fluorescent dye	Life Technologies	CAT: 62249	1:1000, IF	 	Others	DAPI Fluorescent dye	Sigma-Aldrich	CAT: 422801	1:500, IF	 	Others	DRAQ5 Fluorescent dye	CST	CAT: 4084	1:1000, IF	 	Cell line (Mus musculus)	EpH4	Dr. Jurgen Knoblich, Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, Vienna, Austria		Identity verified by RNAseq, DNA sequencing and immunofluorescent staining for epithelial markers	 	Cell line (Homo sapiens)	HEK293T	ATCC	RRID:CVCL_0063		 	Cell line (Homo sapiens)	MCF10a	ATCC	RRID:CVCL_0598		 	Cell line (Mus musculus)	NIH 3T3	ATCC	RRID:CVCL_0594		 	Strain (Mus musculus)	C3H/HeNCrl	Charles River Laboratories	CAT: CRL:025, RRID:IMSR_CRL:025		 	Chemical compound, drug	BV6	ApexBio	CAT: B4653		 	Software, algorithm	GraphPad Prism	GraphPad	RRID:SCR_002798		 	Software, algorithm	CLC Genomics Workbench	QIAGEN	RRID:SCR_011853		 	Software, algorithm	Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Qiagen)	QIAGEN	SCR_008653		 	Software, algorithm	Fiji is just ImageJ	N/A	RRID:SCR_002285		 	Software, algorithm	MAGeCK software	, PMID:25476604	N/A
Whole-genome CRISPR KO screen
Mouse CRISPR GeCKO v2 Knockout Pooled Library was purchased from Addgene. The library was amplified according to the developer’s protocol. Library lentiviruses were produced as described below. EpH4-FUCCI cells transduced with the library were grown for 10 days to allow time for gene-editing and depletion of the target proteins. The cells were then seeded at 100,000 cells/cm2 and cultured for 4 days, then trypsinized with 0.25% trypsin (Gibco) and 4 × 107 cells (about 300 cells per sgRNA) were sorted on a FACSAria III for mCitrine+ (proliferating) cells. This population was replated, expanded, and resorted for mCitrine+ cells. This process was repeated for a total of three sorts. Genomic DNA from 4 × 107 cells before sorting, and after the first, second, and third rounds of sorting was purified using Blood and Cell Culture DNA Midi Kit (Qiagen). The sgRNA sequences were PCR amplified (26 × 100 μl reactions) from genomic DNA (~260 μg) using adaptor primers developed by the Zhang laboratory. The products of the first PCR reactions were amplified again with Illumina index primers to add barcodes and Illumina adaptors. The products of this reaction were purified and sequenced on a Novaseq instrument. We utilized MAGeCK software to analyze the fastq files. A read count distribution graph was generated using RStudio.
Plasmid constructs and primers
ES-FUCCI (plasmid # 62451) and DHB-mVenus (plasmid #136461) were purchased from Addgene. The p27 shRNA clone TRCN0000287390 in pLKO1 was obtained from the Sigma MISSION shRNA library. p27 knockdown was tested by qPCR and compared to cells transduced with a scrambled non-targeting control shRNA (Figure 1—source data 1).
The sgRNAs used in this study are listed in the Key Resources Table. sgRNAs were cloned into lentiCRISPR v2 vector at the BsmBI restriction site using Zhang lab protocol. p100 sgRNAs were cloned into a modified pLVTHM GFP vector between ClaI and MluI sites or into lentiCRISPR v2 vector.
Deletion of TRAF3 binding motif (amino acids 78–84) from wild-type NIK cDNA was performed by site-directed mutagenesis. NIK-ΔT3 cDNA was cloned into the pWPI mScarlet vector between BamHI and AscI sites.
Cell culture, lentiviral transductions, transfections, and chemicals
EpH4 cells were obtained from Dr. Jurgen Knoblich (Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, Vienna, Austria). HEK293T, MCF10a, and NIH 3T3 were obtained from the ATCC. Cells are routinely tested for mycoplasma contamination by Hoechst DNA staining, and all were found to be negative. EpH4, NIH 3T3, and HEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Atlanta Biologicals) and 1× penicillin/streptomycin (Life Technologies). MCF10a cells were cultured in DMEM/F12 media (Gibco) supplemented with 5% horse serum (Gibco), EGF 20 ng/ml (Sigma), hydrocortisone 0.5 mg/ml (Sigma), cholera toxin 100 ng/ml (MP Biomedicals), insulin 10 μg/ml (Sigma), and 1× penicillin/streptomycin (Life Technologies). EpH4 cells were seeded at 100,000 cells/cm2 and cultured for 1 or 4 days. MCF10a cells were seeded at 100,000 cells/cm2 and cultured for 5 days. Lentiviruses were produced by calcium phosphate transfection of HEK293T cells with lentivectors and lentiviral packaging vectors psPAX2 and pMD2.G. Lentiviruses were collected and concentrated 48 hr after transduction, utilizing Amicon centrifugal filter units. EpH4 and MCF10a cells were transduced by lentiviruses by shaking cells and viruses in suspension at 400 rpm, 37°C for 1 hr. Transduced cells were selected by puromycin (CRISPR v2 vectors) or FACS (pWPI mScarlet, pLVTHM GFP, and DHB-mVenus vectors). EpH4 cells used for mixing experiments were NT pWPI mScarlet, NT pLVTHM GFP, and Traf3 KO1 pWPI mScarlet. SMAC mimetic BV6 was purchased from ApexBio (B4653).
To develop the EpH4 ES-FUCCI stable cell line we linearized the ES-FUCCI vector with AseI and transduced cells using Xfect (Clontech) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Cells were selected with 300 µg/ml Hygromycin followed by FAC sorting of mCitrine+ and/or mCherry+ cells.
Flow cytometry analysis
Cells were treated with 3 µg/ml BrdU (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hr, then washed in sterile PBS and trypsinized. Trypsin was blocked with complete medium plus 50 µg/ml DNase to reduce clumping of cells. Cells were pelleted, incubated in 5 mM EDTA in PBS on ice for 10 min, and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 15 min at room temperature. BrdU incorporation was detected after treatment with 2N HCl for 20 min at 37°C, washing with 1.5 M Na2B4O7, blocking in Western Blocking reagent (Roche), and staining with anti-BrdU antibodies (1:800, Abcam, ab6326). Cells were analyzed using a Fortessa flow cytometer and analyzed using FlowJo.
Immunoblotting
Cells were lysed in buffer containing 0.1% Triton-X100, 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl, and 2 mM EDTA supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), Calyculin A, and PhosStop phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Cell lysates were briefly sonicated and centrifuged at 16,100 g for 10 min. After centrifugation, the soluble fraction was boiled with SDS sample buffer for 5 min. Antibodies used for western blotting are listed in the Key Resources Table.
Immunofluorescence staining, image acquisition, and analysis
Cells were grown on LabTek II chamber slides (Thermo Scientific) for the indicated times and fixed with 4% PFA at room temperature for 15 min. Cells were permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100, blocked in 1× Western Blocking Reagent (Roche), and labeled for IF imaging. Primary antibodies used for IF are listed in the Key Resources Table. Secondary labeling was performed using Alexa Fluor secondary antibodies (1:500-1:1000, Life Technologies). Samples were mounted using Fluoromount G (Electron Microscopy Sciences). Laser scanning confocal images were acquired using 20×/0.75 Plan Apo or 100×/1.40 Plan Apo oil immersion objectives on a Nikon A1R inverted confocal microscope (Nikon Instruments Inc). Epifluorescence images were acquired using an EVOS FL inverted microscope (Life Technologies). Fiji software was used for post-acquisition processing.
Fiji Temporal Color Code function (fire color scale) was used for depth color coding of cells for visualization of multilayering. To measure the percent of multilayering in KO cells, we used Fiji software to process confocal image stacks of cells that had been grown to high density and stained for a nuclear marker. A single slice above the monolayer (about 8 µm above the center of the nuclei in the first layer of cells) was processed using Gaussian blur and Threshold to create a binary mask. It was analyzed using Measure particles function to determine the percent of total area that is above the monolayer. Data were collected for five fields of view in three biological repeats.
Nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio of YAP was measured using the ImageJ Intensity Ratio Nuclei CytoplasmTool (RRID:SCR_018573; https://github.com/MontpellierRessourcesImagerie/imagej_macros_and_scripts/wiki/Intensity-Ratio-Nuclei-Cytoplasm-Tool).
Real-time qPCR
Total RNA was extracted with TRIzol (Life Technologies). cDNA was reverse transcribed using the SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen). qPCR was performed with triplicate replicates on a BioRad CFX96 Thermocycler and analyzed using the ΔΔCt method. Expression levels were calculated relative to Gapdh. p27 levels were assessed using p27 primers. The primers are listed in the Key Resources Table. The enrichment of cells containing sh-p27 after FACS was assessed using puromycin resistance gene primers, because the Puro cassette was integrated into the cell genome together with the p27 shRNA.
RNA sequencing
NT, TRAF3 KO1, and TRAF3/p100 double KO EpH4-FUCCI cells were sorted for non-proliferating cells (mCherry+) by FACS. RNA from NT, TRAF3 KO1, and TRAF3/p100 double KO cells from two experimental repeats was isolated using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). RNA quality control was performed using a 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies). Samples had RNA integrity numbers in the range 8.1–9.3. Sequencing was performed using the NovaSeq 6000 Sequencing System (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Data were processed and analyzed with CLC Genomics Workbench and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Qiagen).
Mouse mammary gland organoids
Mammary glands were isolated from 8-week-old C3H mice as described previously. Cells were then briefly treated with 0.25% trypsin and filtered through a 40 μm strainer. Primary mammary cells were transduced with lentiCRISPR v2 NT control and Traf3 KO1 and grown for 8 days in 50% Matrigel (Corning) supplemented with Organoid Growth Medium (DMEM/F12 (Gibco), 5 ng/ml EGF (Sigma), 3 ng/ml mFGF2 (R and D Systems), and 1× ITS (Millipore Sigma)). Then organoids were fixed with PFA and immunostained. All mouse experimental procedures were approved by Vanderbilt Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee; IACUC protocol number M1800045, Exp: 04/26/2021.
Statistical analysis
Data were tested for normality by Shapiro–Wilk test and then analyzed by Student’s t-test, one-way ANOVA, or mixed model two-way ANOVA statistical test using GraphPad Prism software. When using ANOVA, post hoc analysis was done using Tukey or Dunnett multiple comparison tests. All statistical analyses were considered significant at p<0.05. Data presented as SuperPlots combine individual measurements (small dots color coded for each replicate), mean values for each replicate (large dots color coded for each replicate), and mean ± s.d.
Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grant:
to Ian G Macara.
Additional information
Competing interests
No competing interests declared.
Author contributions
Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing.
Conceptualization, Resources, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Project administration, Writing - review and editing.
Ethics
Animal experimentation: All mouse experimental procedures were approved by Vanderbilt Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee; IACUC protocol number M1800045, Exp: 04/26/2021.
Additional files
Data availability
Sequencing data have been deposited in GEO under accession code GSE147767 All other data generated or analysed during this study are included in the manuscript and supporting files.
The following dataset was generated:
Fomicheva
M
Macara
IG
2020
NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus
GSE147767
Decision letter
Pan
Duojia
In the interests of transparency, eLife publishes the most substantive revision requests and the accompanying author responses.
[Editors' note: this paper was reviewed by Review Commons.]
Acceptance summary:
This study reports the identification of Traf3, a negative regulator of NF-κB signaling, as a novel regulator of density-dependent proliferation from a cell-based CRISPR screen. The authors further show that loss of Traf3 specifically activates non-canonical NF-κB signaling, which in turn triggers an innate immune response and drives cell division independently of known density-dependent proliferation mechanisms, including YAP/TAZ signaling and cyclin kinase inhibitors. Overall, this is a well-executed study that has revealed novel insights into the control of epithelial cell proliferation.
10.7554/eLife.63603.sa2
Author response
Reviewer #1
This is an interesting manuscript which is utilizing comprehensive CRISPR lossof-function screen in conjunction with cell cycle fluorescence reporter (FUCCI) to identify novel regulators underlying cell density dependent proliferation of mouse/human epithelium cells. Besides know regulators, Traf3, a negative regulator of NF-κB signaling was revealed to functionally involve in density-dependent proliferation regulation in both mouse and human epithelium cell lines and primary cell derived organelles. They further conducted validation, signaling pathway analysis and transcriptome characterization. And they proposed that loss of Traf3 specifically activates non-canonical NF-κB signaling, which in turn triggers an innate immune response. The Traf3 seems to work independent of canonical YAP/TAZ signaling and cyclin kinase inhibitors. Overall, this is a well-designed and appropriately executed study. The data were collected with proper controls and largely supports the conclusions drawn. Several key issues should be clarified to further strengthen the manuscript as follows:
Major points
1) It has been known that unlike other Traf family members, Traf3 plays an essential role in regulating the noncanonical NF-κB activity in vivo and in vivo, which has been studies in other systems (such as J Biol Chem. 2007 Feb 9;282(6):3688-94). That's being said, mechanism novelty is less empowered.
We were aware that the function of TRAF3 as a negative regulator of non-canonical NFκB signaling is well known, but the novelty of our study concerns the impact of this pathway on density-dependent cell proliferation, which we believe to be novel and unexpected.
2) The largest part of manuscript heavily relies on the EpH4 cell line including the CRISPR screen, validation and mechanism study. Although human MCF10A and primary mouse organelles were used to confirm the phenotype, it is still not quite clear whether the phenotype presented here is specific to epithelial cells. More cell lines and control cell lines should be included to clarify this point.
We agree, and in response we have knocked out Traf3 in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts, as an example of a non-epithelial cell line. We observed that TRAF3 KO 3T3 cells lose contact inhibition and over-proliferate in dense monolayers, compared to control (Figure 3—figure supplement 1C-D’).
3) It's interesting such screening did not identify typical tumor suppressors such as Trp53. I then realize that EpH4 is an immortalized mouse mammary gland epithelial cell line (Fialka et al., 1996), which may undergo selective deletion or mutation of Trp53 or Rb1. If so, the dispensable role of cyclin kinase inhibitors is expected. Authors should characterize the cell line. Again, as stated in 2#, more cell lines and controls should be validated.
Cell cycle arrest at high density is not normally controlled by Trp53, so it is unsurprising that this gene did not show up in our screen. Although the EpH4 cell might not contain functional p53, we confirmed the over-proliferation phenotype and activation of noncanonical NF-κB in primary mammary gland organoids. This result demonstrates that the response is not dependent on mutant p53.
4) I will not recommend the tone of "Epithelial Homeostasis" given the entire study is based on pure cell culture work unless in vivo data could be provided.
As suggested, we have changed the title to avoid the term “epithelial homeostasis”. However, we discuss homeostatic cell density control in the text of the manuscript because this term is not specific to in vivo situations but describes a collective cell behavior that is also observed in vitro.
Minor comments:
1) It will be helpful to include a schematic diagram of FUCCI vector and working model in Figure 1A to keep readers who do not have related background to follow the design.
We agree and have included a schematic of FUCCI in Figure 1.
2) P value should be provided between groups in Figure 1B.
We did not provide a p value because this was a single representative experiment with 3 technical repeats, just used as a proof-of-principle experiment. We have moved these data to supplementary information section.
3) I find out redundant description of CRISPR screen and candidates, which would benefit from trimming most of statement and only focusing on Traf3 to connect to the function in the following study
We have modified the text to remove redundant descriptions.
Reviewer #1 (Significance (Required)):
This is an interesting manuscript which is utilizing comprehensive CRISPR loss-offunction screen in conjunction with cell cycle fluorescence reporter (FUCCI) to identify novel regulators underlying cell density dependent proliferation of mouse/human epithelium cells. Besides know regulators, Traf3, a negative regulator of NF-κB signaling was revealed to functionally involve in density-dependent proliferation regulation in both mouse and human epithelium cell lines and primary cell derived organelles. They further conducted validation, signaling pathway analysis and transcriptome characterization. And they proposed that loss of Traf3 specifically activates non-canonical NF-κB signaling, which in turn triggers an innate immune response. The Traf3 seems to work independent of canonical YAP/TAZ signaling and cyclin kinase inhibitors. Overall, this is a well-designed and appropriately executed study. The data were collected with proper controls and largely supports the conclusions drawn. It will be of interest to the general audience.
Reviewers cross commenting
I agree with reviewer 2# that the current cell model barely provides anywhere any window to enhance proliferation of fast dividing cells. The authors either choose to employ stress model, or independent cells with optimal test window. Point 3# targeted on the same mechanism concern, which would benefit from additional experiment underlying whether cIAP inhibition by a SMAC-mimetic exert the same effect as TRAF3 KO
Reviewer #2 (Evidence, reproducibility and clarity (Required)):
Fomicheva and Macara designed a CRISPR/Cas9 screen that allows the identification of genes functioning as negative regulators of density-controlled cell cycle in epithelial cells. They found that loss of TRAF3 prevents epithelial cells from halting division at high density. By increasing expression of NIK, TRAF3 ablation induces p100/p52 processing and non-canonical NF-κB signaling in epithelial cells. By generating TRAF3/NIK or TRAF3/p100 DKO cells, they demonstrate that non-canonical NF-κB activation is mediating loss of cell density control upon ablation of TRAF3. The authors present data that exclude autocrine/paracrine activation, involvement of the Hippo pathway or deregulation of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CKI) as mechanisms for loss of density control in TRAF3 KO epithelial cells.
The paper describes a very interesting strategy for identifying negative regulators of cell density control and it provides a new link to non-canonical NF-κB. Technically, the manuscript is very good and the DKOs make a strong link between uncontrolled proliferation upon TRAF3 loss and non-canonical NF-κB activation. However, the functional role of TRAF3 and activation of non-canonical NF-κB remains unresolved. Further, I think the data are not convincingly showing that TRAF3 is selectively affecting epithelial homeostasis by loss or cell density-dependent cell cycle arrest. Thus, the authors need to address the following questions and concerns:
Major points
1) The authors suggest that the TRAF3-NIK-IKKa-p100/p52 axis is selectively regulating density-controlled cell proliferation, but I think the data are not strong enough to support this conclusion. The only data set that supports this conclusion is presented in Figure 2D – F, showing that Brdu incorporation in rapidly cycling low density cells is not enhanced by TRAF3 KO. However, while 50% of the cells are Brdu-positive at low density, only 5% are Brdu-positive at high density. Thus, there is hardly any window to enhance proliferation of fast dividing cells and TRAF3 could simply limit proliferation under restrictive conditions. Thus, the authors should determine if loss of TRAF3 enhances proliferation after serum reduction/withdrawal or other conditions of nutrient restriction. Further, it needs to be addressed if p100 and NIK loss is affecting rapidly dividing cells at low density (low or high serum). Cell cycle analyses by FACS should be performed to clearly determine at what stage of the cell cycle TRAF3 and non-canonical NF-κB are blocking/promoting cell cycle progression.
We agree and have performed serum withdrawal experiments. Serum starvation causes significant reduction in proliferation in NT control cells but not in TRAF3 KO cells (Figure 8C).
Regarding the suggestion that flow cytometry be used to determine what stage of the cell cycle is impacted, we already know from the FUCCI data that at high density the cells are predominantly in G0/G1. When Traf3 is knocked out, some of these cells exit quiescence and enter the cell cycle. We are unclear what additional information flow cytometry would provide. However, we have now tested whether the control cells are actually in G0 and if loss of Traf3 blocks entry into G0. We demonstrated this to be the case through use of a live cell CDK2 biosensor, DHB-mVenus, and by staining with antiphospho-Rb (Ser807/811) (new Figure 8). These data are explained in more detail below
2) The authors state that “… TRAF3 roles in epithelial cells has not been widely investigated….” This may be true, but there is quite an extensive literature on the role of non-canonical NF-κB in epithelial cells and also its role in cell cycle progression through the induction of cyclin D1 during G1-S phase transition (see Demicco et al., 2005, Park et al., 2006, Rocha et al., 2003, Zhang et al., 2007, Cao et al., 2001, and PMID16713561, 11713278, 20420878). My best explanation would be that p52, potentially in concert with BCL3, is inducing D-type cyclins and enforcing G1/S phase transition. This needs to be tested and it needs to be investigated if this regulation is cell density-dependent (see point 1).
This is an interesting point. We tested if TRAF3 KO cells have changes in CYCLIN D1 levels by immunofluorescent staining. Quantifications of CYCLIN D1 intensity showed modest but significant increase of CYCLIN D1 in TRAF3 KO cells (Figure 8A, B). As mentioned above, we also tested whether the loss of TRAF3 prevents cells at high density from entering G0. Cells exiting the cell cycle and entering G0 are known to have very low CDK2 activity, and to determine if loss of TRAF3 prevents entry into G0, we used a previously validated biosensor, DHB-mVenus, which can quantitatively reveal CDK2 activity in live cells based on its distribution between the nucleus (G0/G1) and cytoplasm (G2/M) (new Figure 8D). As shown in new Figure 8E and G, at high density control cells enter quiescence, with almost exclusive nuclear localization of the biosensor. In contrast, cells lacking TRAF3 show an increased percent of cytoplasmic DHB-mVenus localization at high density, consistent with them continuing in cycle instead of entering quiescence.
Additionally, we stained the cells for phospho-Rb (Ser807/811). The retinoblastoma protein is a central regulator of the cell cycle, and becomes dephosphorylated in G0, but is progressively phosphorylated and inactivated as cells leave G0 and move through G1 into S phase (Figure 8D). Rb phosphorylation was very low in NT control at high density but loss of TRAF3 induced a dramatic increase in phospho-Rb positive cells (new Figure 8E, F). Together, these data strongly argue that the key effect of loss of TRAF3 is a failure to enter G0 under conditions that normally promote quiescence.
3) Even though TRAF3 KO relieves cell density control, it remains unclear how the system would be regulated under physiological conditions. Is TRAF3 expression induced at high density? How are the TRAF3 interactors TRAF2 and cIAP1/2 regulated? Does cIAP inhibition by a SMAC-mimetic exert the same effect as TRAF3 KO? SMAC-mimetics deplete cIAP1/2 rapidly and thus effects could be determined at low density or after epithelial cells have been grown to high density.
We have not examined TRAF2 or cIAP1/2. We did perform western blots for canonical and non-canonical NF-κB components at high and low density. We observed that levels of non-canonical NF-κB signaling proteins are independent of density. Immunoblotting for the canonical NF-κB pathway components showed activation of IKKα/β phosphorylation at high density both in control and TRAF3 KO cells; but no increase in p65 phosphorylation or IκB degradation was observed in control and TRAF3 KO cells either at low or at high density.
We have also added data on the effect of cIAP inhibition by a SMAC-mimetic BV6 at low and high density. BV6 caused over-proliferation of EpH4 cells at high density but not at low density (New Figure 5H, I).
Specific points:
The short summary on the putative functions of TRAF3 is rather incomprehensive and not very helpful here.
We have removed this section of the text.
Figure 3: What is the effect of an NF2 KO in primary mammary organoids?
We have not focused on NF2 in our study because NF2 was previously shown to inhibit cell overgrowth through its regulation of HIPPO signaling. Therefore, we do not believe that knocking out NF2 in the organoids would be relevant to this study.
Figure 4: It is well established that TRAF3 is primarily regulating non-canonical NF-κB signaling, but this may exert secondary effects on canonical NF-κB. Actually, the enhanced expression of IkBa indicates that the canonical NF-κB inhibitor may be transcriptionally induced by RelB/p52. As shown for p100/p52 in Figure 4G, the authors should provide a more comprehensive analyses of NFkB/IkB family members (e.g. p65, RelB, p100/p50, IkBa), their activity (p-p65, pIkBa) and some upstream regulators (such as IKKa/b, TRAF3, TRAF2 – see also main point 3), to get a conclusive picture on the impact of TRAF3 loss under low and high density.
We agree but do not detect any activation of canonical NF-κB signaling, as we show in Figure 4 G. We have now also added Western blots for NF-κB components at high and low cell density (Figure 4D, E, H).
Figure 6. I think by sorting mCherry G0/G1 phase for transcriptomic analyses, the authors may have unintentionally sorted out the relevant candidate genes from their analyses, such as D- or E-type cyclins, which are induced for G1-S phase transition.
Because cells lacking Traf3 are more likely to enter the cell cycle at high density, then we would fully expect there to be all the expected changes in gene expression associated with progression through S/G2/M phases. This does not, however, explain why the cells are more likely to enter the cell cycle. We predict that loss of TRAF3 must induce some constitutive change in gene expression in all the cells in the culture, which increases the probability of cell cycle entry (or escape from G0 into G1). We have now testing whether escape from G0 is increased by staining for phosphorylated Rb and using a live cell CDK activity biosensor, as described above.
Reviewer #2 (Significance (Required)):
The methodology of CRISPR/Cas9 screening for density-dependent cell cycle arrest is very interesting, powerful and provides a strong advance, because it may be utilized under different conditions. However, it is less clear whether the identified candidate TRAF3 is indeed solely involved in cell density control or more generally restricting proliferation of epithelial cells. Further, the lack of functional data connecting TRAF3 and non-canonical NF-κB to density control is a drawback. Thus, in its current form the study provides mainly a methodological advance. I think more functional data are needed to also provide a conceptual advance and strong visibility for the audience interested in cell cycle and NF-κB regulation in epithelial cells and cancer.
Expertise: Signal transduction, immune response, oncogenic signaling in cancer
Reviewers cross commenting:
I agree with rev#1 that “epithelial homeostasis” may be overstated, especially
since it is not clear, if the TRAF3-NIK-p100 axis may not promote proliferation in other cells as well. Thus, I think adding other cell lines (also non-epithelial) (see rev#1) and providing data, if TRAF3-NIK-p100 is more generally regulating cell cycle or selectively density-controlled proliferation (my comments) is important. Other more mechanistic studies such as Trp53 status, TRAF3 and cyclinD/E regulation and effects of SMAC-mimetics can be done in parallel and results will certainly improve the understanding how loss of TRAF3 influences cell-density control.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PMID 32640256 — A Genome-wide CRISPR Screen Reveals a Role for the Non-canonical Nucleosome-Remodeling BAF Complex in Foxp3 Expression and Regulatory T Cell Function.
Immunity (2020) · https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32640256/

A Genome-wide CRISPR Screen Reveals a Role for the Non-canonical Nucleosome-Remodeling BAF Complex in Foxp3 Expression and Regulatory T Cell Function
Summary
Regulatory T (Treg) cells play a pivotal role in suppressing auto-reactive T cells and maintaining immune homeostasis. Treg cell development and function are dependent on the transcription factor Foxp3. Here, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR loss-of-function screen to identify Foxp3 regulators in mouse primary Treg cells. Foxp3 regulators were enriched in genes encoding subunits of the SWI/SNF nucleosome-remodeling and SAGA chromatin-modifying complexes. Among the three SWI/SNF-related complexes, the Brd9-containing non-canonical (nc) BAF complex promoted Foxp3 expression, whereas the PBAF complex was repressive. Chemical-induced degradation of Brd9 led to reduced Foxp3 expression and reduced Treg cell function in vitro. Brd9 ablation compromised Treg cell function in inflammatory disease and tumor immunity in vivo. Furthermore, Brd9 promoted Foxp3 binding and expression of a subset of Foxp3 target genes. Our findings provide an unbiased analysis of the genetic networks regulating Foxp3 and reveal ncBAF as a target for therapeutic manipulation of Treg cell function.
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
Genome-wide CRISPR screen identifies Foxp3 regulators in primary regulatory T cells
A SWI/SNF variant, the Brd9-containing ncBAF complex, regulates Foxp3 expression
Foxp3 binding to a subset of its target genes is dependent on co-binding of Brd9
Brd9 deficiency in Treg exacerbates IBD and enhances anti-tumor immunity
Regulation of Foxp3 expression is central to Treg cell development and function. Loo et al. performed a genome-wide CRISPR screen and identified the Brd9-containing ncBAF complex as a key regulator of Foxp3 and a subset of its target genes, which could be targeted to cripple Treg cell function and improve anti-tumor immunity.
Introduction
Regulatory T (Treg) cells play a crucial role in maintaining immune system homeostasis by suppressing over-reactive immune responses. Defects in Treg cells lead to autoimmune disorders and immunopathology, whereas certain tumors are enriched with Treg cells that suppress anti-tumor immune responses. Foxp3, a member of the Forkhead transcription factor family, is a critical regulator that orchestrates the molecular processes involved in Treg cell differentiation and function. Therefore, understanding the regulation of Foxp3 expression could reveal novel therapeutic targets to potentially change Treg cell numbers or alter their function. T cell receptor (TCR) and interleukin-2 (IL-2) signaling pathways play critical roles in Foxp3 induction. Transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) signaling is also essential for Foxp3 induction in periphery-derived Treg cells and in-vitro-derived induced Treg (iTreg) cells, although its role in thymus-derived Treg cell development is still under debate. Accordingly, a number of downstream transcription factors regulate Foxp3 induction in vitro or in vivo, including Stat5a/b, Cbf-β/Runx1/3, Nfat1, Smad3/4, cRel, and Creb. Compared with the large number of studies focused on the mechanism of Foxp3 induction, relatively less is known about the factors that maintain Foxp3 expression in mature Treg cells. An intronic enhancer in Foxp3 called CNS2 (conserved non-coding sequence 2), also known as TSDR (Treg-specific demethylated region), is a key cis-regulatory element required for stable Foxp3 expression. CNS2 is heavily methylated in naive and activated conventional T cells by DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1), and deletion of Dnmt1 leads to aberrant expression of Foxp3 in conventional T cells. When Foxp3 expression is induced during Treg cell development, the CNS2 region is rapidly demethylated, opening it up for binding of transcription factors. Foxp3 can bind to CNS2 as well as an to additional upstream enhancer called CNS0 and stabilize its own expression in a positive feedback loop.
Post-translational modifications (PTM) of the Foxp3 protein, including phosphorylation, acetylation, and ubiquitination, are also a crucial part of the regulatory circuit that controls Foxp3 function and stability. For example, a pair of enzymes, the ubiquitin ligase Stub1 and the ubiquitin hydrolase Usp7, promote and inhibit degradation of Foxp3 via ubiquitination, respectively. Finally, intracellular metabolism, specifically the metabolic regulator mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin), has emerged as a key regulator of Foxp3 expression and Treg cell function. Weakened mTOR signaling increases Foxp3 expression in iTreg in vitro, whereas complete ablation of mTOR in Treg cells using genetic models compromises effector Treg cell homeostasis and function. Despite these and other significant advances in understanding the molecular mechanisms regulating Foxp3, we lack a comprehensive picture of the regulatory networks that control Foxp3 expression.
In this study, we performed a genome-wide clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-Cas9 loss-of-function screen to identify regulators of Foxp3 in mouse primary natural Treg cells. Gene Ontology analysis showed that Foxp3 regulators are highly enriched in genes encoding subunits of the SAGA (Spt-Ada-Gcn5 acetyltransferase) chromatin-modifying and SWI/SNF (switch/sucrose non-fermentable) chromatin-remodeling complexes, which we further validated by single-guide RNA (sgRNA) CRISPR targeting and flow cytometry analysis. Of the three related complexes (BAF [BRG1/BRM-associated factors], PBAF [polybromo-associated BAF], and non-canonical BAF [ncBAF]) in the SWI/SNF family of nucleosome remodeling complexes, we found that the Brd9-containing ncBAF complex promoted transcription of Foxp3, whereas the PBAF complex repressed Foxp3 expression. Deletion of Brd9 or the PBAF component Pbrm1 in Treg cells reduced and enhanced Treg cell suppressor activity in in vitro assays, respectively, suggesting divergent regulatory roles of ncBAF and PBAF complexes in controlling Foxp3 expression and Treg cell function. Consistent with this model, we found that chemically induced degradation of Brd9 by dBRD9 led to reduced Foxp3 expression and compromised Treg cell function. Genome-wide binding studies revealed that Brd9 co-localized with Foxp3, including at the CNS0 and CNS2 enhancers at the Foxp3 locus. Furthermore, targeting Brd9 by sgRNA or dBRD9 reduced Foxp3 binding at the Foxp3 locus and a subset of Foxp3 binding sites genome-wide, which resulted in differential expression of many Foxp3-dependent genes, indicating that Brd9 participates in regulation of the Foxp3-dependent transcriptional program. Finally, deletion of Brd9 in Treg cells reduced suppressor activity in an in vivo model of T cell transfer-induced colitis and improved anti-tumor immune responses in an MC38 colorectal cancer cell-induced cancer model. Our findings reveal genes and networks regulating Foxp3 expression and identify the ncBAF complex as a potential target for manipulation of Treg function in vitro and in vivo.
Results
Genome-wide CRISPR Screen in Natural Treg Cells Identifies Regulators of Foxp3
A Genome-wide CRISPR Screen in Treg Cells
(A) Workflow of the CRISPR screen in Treg cells.
(B–D) Validation of the CRISPR screen conditions.
(B) Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) plots showing Foxp3 expression in Treg cells after sgRNA targeting of Foxp3 (sgFoxp3), the positive regulator Cbfb (sgCbfb), and the negative regulator Dnmt1 (sgDnmt1). Red and green gates were set based on Foxp3 low 20% and high 20% in sgNT Treg cells, respectively.
(C and D) Mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of Foxp3 (C) and relative log2 fold change of the cell count (D), comparing Foxp3lo with Foxp3hi after deletion of the indicated target gene (n = 3 per group; data represent mean ± SD).
See also Figures S1 and S2.
To screen for genes that regulate Foxp3 expression, we developed a pooled retroviral CRISPR sgRNA library by subcloning an optimized mouse genome-wide lentiviral CRISPR sgRNA library (lentiCRISPRv2-Brie) into a newly engineered retroviral vector pSIRG-NGFR, which allowed us to efficiently transduce mouse primary T cells and perform intracellular staining for Foxp3 without losing the transduction marker NGFR (nerve growth factor receptor) after cell permeabilization (Figure S1). Using this library, we performed a CRISPR loss-of-function screen on Treg cells to identify genes that regulate Foxp3 expression. We activated CD4+Foxp3+ Treg cells isolated from Rosa-Cas9/Foxp3Thy1.1 reporter mice with CD3 and CD28 antibodies and IL-2 (Figure 1 A). Treg cells were transduced 24 h post-activation with the pooled retroviral sgRNA library at a multiplicity of infection of less than 0.2 to ensure that only one sgRNA was transduced per cell. NGFR+ transduced Treg cells were collected on day 3 and day 6 to identify genes that are essential for cell proliferation and survival. In addition, the bottom quintile (NGFR+Foxp3lo) and top quintile (NGFR+Foxp3hi) populations were collected on day 6 to identify genes that regulate Foxp3 expression. We validated the screen conditions by transducing Treg cells with sgRNAs targeting Foxp3 itself as well as previously reported positive (Cbfb) and negative (Dnmt1) regulators of Foxp3 (Figures 1B–1D). Guide RNA sequences integrated within the genomic DNA of sorted cells were recovered by PCR amplification, constructed into amplicon libraries, and sequenced with a NextSeq sequencer.
Identification of Foxp3 Regulators in Treg Cells
(A and B) A scatterplot of the Treg cell screen results, showing positive regulators (A) and negative regulators (B). Genes that met the cutoff criteria (p < 0.01 and LFC > ±0.5) are shown as red dots for positive regulators and as green dots for negative regulators.
(C) Distribution of sgRNA LFC comparing Foxp3lo with Foxp3hi. Red stripes represent sgRNAs from positive Foxp3 regulators, whereas green stripes represent sgRNAs from negative Foxp3 regulators.
(D) Venn diagram showing the overlap of Foxp3 regulators with genes involved in cell contraction or expansion.
(E and F) Gene Ontology analysis of positive Foxp3 regulators (E) and negative Foxp3 regulators (F).
See also Figures S3 and S4 and Tables S1, S2, S3, and S4.
The relative enrichment of sgRNAs between samples and hit identification were computed by MAGeCK (model-based analysis of genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 knockout), which generates a normalized sgRNA read count table for each sample, calculates the fold change of sgRNA read counts between two cell populations, and further aggregates information of four sgRNAs targeting each gene to generate a ranked gene list. Prior to hit calling, we evaluated the quality of screen samples by measuring the percentage of mapped reads to the sgRNA library and total read coverage, which showed a high mapping rate (79.8%–83.4%) with an average of 236X coverage and a low number of missing sgRNAs (0.625%–2.5%) (Figure S2). With the cutoff criteria of log2 fold change (LFC) of more than ± 0.5 and a p value of less than 0.01, we identified 254 potential positive Foxp3 regulators enriched in the Foxp3lo population and 490 potential negative Foxp3 regulators enriched in the Foxp3hi population (Figures 2A and 2B; Table S1). In a parallel analysis, we also identified 22 and 1,497 genes that affect cell expansion and contraction, respectively (p < 0.002, LFC > 1; Figure S3; Table S2). As expected, we identified genes belonging to pathways known to regulate Foxp3 expression transcriptionally (Cbfb and Runx3) and post-transcriptionally through regulation of Foxp3 protein stability (Usp7 and Stub1) (; Figure 2C).
We next compared the potential positive and negative regulators with genes involved in cell contraction and expansion to exclude hits that might affect Foxp3 expression indirectly by affecting cellular fitness in general, leaving 197 positive Foxp3 regulators and 327 negative Foxp3 regulators (Figure 2D; Table S3). Gene Ontology analysis of positive Foxp3 regulators revealed a number of notable functional clusters, including SAGA-type complex, negative regulation of T cell activation, RNA polymerase II holoenzyme, positive regulation of histone modification, and SWI/SNF complex (Figure 2E; Table S4). Among negative Foxp3 regulators, genes were highly enriched in clusters related to negative regulation of mTOR signaling, transcriptional repressor complex, mRNA decay and metabolism, and hypusine synthesis from eIF5A-lysine (Figure 2F; Table S4). Several of these pathways, including mTOR signaling, Foxp3 ubiquitination and deubiquitination, and transcriptional regulation, have been implicated previously in Foxp3 regulation, suggesting that our screen is robust for validation of known pathways and discovery of additional regulators of Foxp3. Specifically, we identified many genes encoding subunits of the SAGA (Ccdc101, Tada2b, Tada3, Usp22, Tada1, Taf6l, Supt5, and Supt20) and SWI/SNF (Arid1a, Brd9, and Smarcd1) complexes (Table S4), strongly suggesting that these complexes could have indispensable roles in Foxp3 expression. We thus further validated and characterized the SAGA and SWI/SNF-related complexes to understand their roles in Foxp3 expression and Treg cell function.
Validation of the SAGA Complex as a Regulator of Foxp3 Expression and Treg Cell Suppressor Activity
The SAGA complex possesses histone acetyltransferase (HAT) and histone deubiquitinase (DUB) activity and functions as a transcriptional co-activator through interactions with transcription factors and the general transcriptional machinery. We identified Ccdc101, Tada2b, and Tada3 in the HAT module; Usp22 in the DUB module; and Tada1, Taf6l, Supt5, and Supt20 from the core structural module among positive Foxp3 regulators that do not affect cell expansion or contraction (Figure S4A). We sought to validate the potential regulatory function of SAGA complex subunits by using sgRNAs to target individual subunits in Treg cells and measure Foxp3 expression (Figures S4B and S4C). We found that deletion of every subunit tested resulted in a significant and 19%–29% reduction in Foxp3 mean fluorescence intensity (MFI). We then further tested the function of the SAGA subunit Usp22 in an in vitro suppression assay, which measures suppression of T cell proliferation when conventional T cells are co-cultured with Treg cells at increasing ratios. We found that Treg cells transduced with sgRNAs targeting Usp22 had compromised Treg cell suppressor activity compared with Treg cells transduced with a non-targeting control sgRNA, with significantly more proliferation of T effector (Teff) cells at every ratio of Treg to Teff cells tested (Figure S4D). These results provide independent validation of our genome-wide screen analyses for this class of chromatin regulators and demonstrate that disrupting the SAGA complex with sgUsp22 reduces Foxp3 expression and Treg cell suppressor function.
Identification of the Brd9-Containing ncBAF Complex as a Specific Regulator of Foxp3 Expression
The Three SWI/SNF Complex Assemblies Have Distinct Regulatory Roles for Foxp3 Expression in Treg Cells
(A) A diagram showing three different variants of SWI/SNF complexes: BAF, ncBAF, and PBAF. BAF-specific subunits (Arid1a and Dpf1–Dpf3) are colored blue, ncBAF-specific subunits (Brd9, Smarcd1, Gltscr1l, and Gltscr1) are colored orange, and PBAF-specific subunits (Pbrm1, Arid2, Brd7, and Phf10) are colored green. Shared components among complexes are colored gray. Also shown is an immunoprecipitation assay of Arid1a, Brd9, Phf10, and Smarca4 in Treg cells. The co-precipitated proteins were probed for shared subunits (Smarca4, Smarcc1, and Smarcb1), BAF-specific Arid1a, ncBAF-specific Brd9, and PBAF-specific Pbrm1.
(B) FACS histogram of Foxp3 expression in Treg cells after sgRNA targeting of the indicated SWI/SNF subunits.
(C) MFI of Foxp3 after sgRNA targeting of the indicated SWI/SNF subunits. Data represent mean and standard deviation of biological replicates (n = 3–21).
(D) Principal-component analysis of RNA-seq data collected from Treg cells transduced with guides against the indicated SWI/SNF subunits. In cases where two independent guides were used to target a gene, the second guide for targeting the gene is indicated as “-2.”
(E) MFI of Foxp3 expression in Treg cells after treatment with DMSO or 0.16–10 μM dBRD9 for 4 days.
Data represent mean ± SD. Statistical analyses were performed using unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test (non-significant [ns], p ≥ 0.05; ∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗p < 0.001; ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001). See also Figure S5.
We next wanted to characterize the role of SWI/SNF complex variants (BAF, ncBAF, and PBAF complexes) in Foxp3 expression. Apart from uniquely incorporating Brd9, the ncBAF complex also contains Gltscr1 or the paralog Gltscr1l and lacks the BAF- and PBAF-specific subunits Arid1a, Arid1b, Arid2, Smarce1, Smarcb1, Smarcd2, Smarcd3, Dpf1–Dpf3, Pbrm1, Brd7, and Phf10 (Figure 3 A). The distinct biochemical compositions of these three SWI/SNF complex assemblies suggest functional diversity. However, it is not known which SWI/SNF complex assemblies are expressed in Treg cells, and the potential roles of specific SWI/SNF variants in regulating Foxp3 expression and Treg cell development have not been studied. Therefore, we performed co-immunoprecipitation assays to probe the composition of SWI/SNF-related complexes in Treg cells. As expected, immunoprecipitation of Smarca4, a core component of all three SWI/SNF complexes, revealed an association of the common subunits Smarcc1 and Smarcb1 as well as the specific subunits Arid1a, Brd9, and Pbrm1. Immunoprecipitations against Arid1a, Brd9, and Phf10 revealed a specific association of these subunits with BAF, ncBAF, and PBAF complexes, respectively (Figure 3A). These results established that all three SWI/SNF complexes are present with the expected composition in Treg cells.
In our screen, we identified Brd9, Smarcd1, and Arid1a among positive regulators of Foxp3, whereas the SWI/SNF shared subunits Smarca4, Smarcb1, Smarce1, and Actl6a were identified in cell contraction (Table S3). This suggests a potential regulatory role of ncBAF and/or BAF complexes. To explore the specific function of BAF, ncBAF, and PBAF complexes in Foxp3 expression, we cloned independent sgRNAs to target unique subunits for each complex and measured Foxp3 MFI in sgRNA-transduced Treg cells. We observed an essential role of the ncBAF complex in Foxp3 expression in Treg cells. Specifically, sgRNA targeting of ncBAF-specific subunits, including Brd9 and Smarcd1, significantly diminished Foxp3 expression by nearly 40% in Treg cells (Figures 3B and 3C). sgRNA targeting of the ncBAF-specific paralogs Gltscr1 and Gltscr1l individually resulted in a slight reduction in Foxp3 expression, which was further reduced by Gltscr1/Gltscr1l double deficiency, suggesting that these two paralogs can compensate in the regulation of Foxp3 expression (Figure 3C). In contrast, sgRNA targeting of PBAF-specific subunits, including Pbrm1, Arid2, Brd7, and Phf10, significantly enhanced Foxp3 expression by as much as 17% (Figure 3C, green). sgRNA targeting of the BAF-specific subunits Arid1a, Arid1b, Dpf1, and Dpf2 did not significantly affect Foxp3 expression (Figure 3C, blue). To determine whether Arid1a and Arid1b could be compensating for one another, we performed Arid1a/Arid1b double deletion and found that deletion of either or both Arid paralogs resulted in a slight but non-significant reduction in Foxp3 MFI (Figure 3C, blue). These data suggest that ncBAF and PBAF have opposing roles in the regulation of Foxp3 expression. To further explore the role of different SWI/SNF complexes in Treg cell genome-wide transcription, we performed RNA sequencing from Treg cells with sgRNA targeting of variant-specific subunits with one or two independent guide RNAs and conducted a principal-component analysis, which showed that ncBAF, PBAF, and BAF also have distinct effects at the whole-transcriptome level in Treg cells (Figure 3D).
We then made use of a recently developed chemical Brd9 protein degrader (dBRD9) as an orthogonal method to probe Brd9 function. dBRD9 is a bifunctional molecule that links a small molecule that specifically binds to the bromodomain of Brd9 and another ligand that recruits the cereblon E3 ubiquitin ligase. We confirmed that treatment of Treg cells with dBRD9 resulted in reduced Brd9 protein (Figure S5A). Similar to sgRNA depletion of Brd9, dBRD9 treatment significantly decreased Foxp3 expression in Treg cells in a concentration-dependent manner without affecting cell viability or proliferation (Figure 3E; Figure S5B). These data demonstrate the requirement for Brd9 in maintenance of Foxp3 expression using genetic and chemically induced proteolysis methods.
Brd9 Regulates Foxp3 Binding at the CNS0 and CNS2 Enhancers and a Subset of Foxp3 Target Sites
Brd9 Deletion Reduces Foxp3 Binding at CNS0 and CNS2 Enhancers and a Subset of Foxp3 Target Sites
(A) Genome browser tracks of Smarca4, Brd9, and Phf10 ChIP-seq and ATAC-seq signals as well as Foxp3 ChIP-seq in sgNT, sgFoxp3, sgBrd9, and sgPbrm1 Treg cells and Foxp3 in DMSO- and dBRD9-treated Treg cells (2.5 μM dBRD9 for 4 days). The Foxp3 locus is shown with CNS0 and CNS2 enhancers, indicated as gray ovals.
(B) Heatmap of Foxp3, Brd9, Smarca4, and Phf10 ChIP-seq and ATAC-seq signals ± 3 kb, centered on Foxp3-bound sites in Treg, ranked according to Foxp3 read density.
(C) Venn diagram of the overlap between ChIP-seq peaks in Treg cells for Brd9, Foxp3, and Phf10 (hypergeometric p of Brd9:Foxp3 overlap = e−27665, hypergeometric p of PHF10:Foxp3 overlap = e−17185, hypergeometric p of Brd9:PHF10 overlap = e−14217).
(D) Heatmap of Foxp3 ChIP-seq signals in sgNT, sgFoxp3, sgBrd9, and sgPbrm1 Treg cells ± 3 kb, centered on Foxp3-bound sites in sgNT, ranked according to read density.
(E) Venn diagram of the overlap (hypergeometric p = e−11,653) between sites that significantly lose Foxp3 binding (FC 1.5, Poisson p < 0.0001) in sgFoxp3 and sgBrd9, overlaid on all Foxp3-bound sites in sgNT (gray).
(F) Histogram of Foxp3 ChIP read density ± 1 kb surrounding the peak center of sites that significantly lose Foxp3 binding in sgFoxp3 and sgBrd9 (n = 1,699) in sgNT, sgFoxp3, sgBrd9, and sgPbrm1.
(G) As in (E) but for sites that lose H3K27ac (FC 1.5, Poisson p < 0.0001, hypergeometric p of overlap = e−7,938).
(H) As in (F) but for H3K27ac ChIP read density.
(I) As in (D) but for Foxp3 ChIP-seq signals in DMSO- and dBRD9-treated Treg cells at all Foxp3-bound sites in DMSO.
(J) As in (E), but for sites that significantly lose Foxp3 binding in dBRD9 treated Treg cells versus DMSO (FC 1.5, Poisson p < 0.0001).
(K) As in (F) but for DMSO- and dBRD9-treated cells.
(L) As in (F) but for Treg cells transduced with sgNT or sgBrd9, with ectopic expression of the MIGR vector control or Foxp3.
See also Figure S6.
To dissect the molecular mechanism of how ncBAF and PBAF complexes regulate Foxp3 expression in Treg cells, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by genome-wide sequencing (ChIP-seq) in Treg cells using antibodies against the ncBAF-specific subunit Brd9, the PBAF-specific subunit Phf10, and the shared enzymatic subunit Smarca4. Data generated from these ChIP-seq experiments revealed that Brd9, Smarca4, and Phf10 co-localize at CNS2 in the Foxp3 gene locus and at CNS0 found within the Ppp1r3f gene immediately upstream of Foxp3 (Figure 4 A). Because CNS2 has been shown previously to regulate stable Foxp3 expression through a positive feedback loop involving Foxp3 binding, and Foxp3 is additionally bound at CNS0 in Treg cells, we rationalized that ncBAF and/or PBAF complexes might affect Foxp3 expression by regulating Foxp3 binding at CNS2 and CNS0. We therefore performed Foxp3 ChIP-seq in Treg cells transduced with sgNT, sgFoxp3, sgBrd9, or sgPbrm1. We observed a dramatic reduction in Foxp3 binding at CNS2/CNS0 in sgFoxp3-transduced cells, as expected, and there was also a marked reduction in Foxp3 binding at CNS2/CNS0 in Brd9-depleted Treg cells (Figure 4A). In contrast, we observed a subtle increase in Foxp3 binding at CNS2/CNS0 in Pbrm1 sgRNA-transduced Treg cells, which could explain why Pbrm1 emerged as a negative regulator of Foxp3 expression in our validation studies (Figure 4A). These data suggest that Brd9 positively regulates Foxp3 expression by promoting Foxp3 binding to its own enhancers.
We then extended this analysis to examine the cooperation between Brd9 and Foxp3 genome-wide. Notably, we found co-binding of Brd9, Smarca4, and Phf10 with Foxp3 at a subset of Foxp3-bound sites (Figures 4B and 4C). All four factors localized to promoters and intronic and intergenic regions of the genome, and their binding correlated well with chromatin accessibility, as measured by an assay of transposase-accessible chromatin with sequencing (ATAC-seq) (Figures 4B and S6A). Motif analysis of Foxp3-bound sites revealed an enrichment for motifs recognized by Ets and Runx transcription factors, consistent with what has been shown previously. Ets and Runx motifs were also among the most significant motifs at both Brd9-bound sites, along with enrichment of the Ctcf motif, as we and others reported previously (; Figure S6B). These results demonstrate that ncBAF and PBAF complexes are co-localized with Foxp3 at Foxp3 binding sites genome-wide.
To assess the requirement for Brd9 or Pbrm1 in Foxp3 targeting genome-wide, we analyzed Foxp3 binding in Treg cells transduced with sgNT, sgFoxp3, sgBrd9, or sgPbrm1 at all Foxp3 binding sites (Figure 4D). As expected, we found that Foxp3 binding was lost at over 85% of its binding sites in sgFoxp3-transduced Treg cells (Figure 4E). Foxp3 binding at a subset of these sites was also significantly reduced in sgBrd9-transduced Treg cells (fold change 1.5, Poisson p < 0.0001) (Figure 4E; Figures S6C–S6F). This was a specific function of Brd9 because Foxp3 binding did not change in Pbrm1-depleted Treg cells at these Brd9-dependent sites (Figure 4F; Figure S6C). ChIP-seq for the active histone mark H3 lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac) revealed that Brd9 and Foxp3 cooperate to maintain H3K27ac at over 1,800 shared sites (Figure 4G). At Brd9-dependent Foxp3 sites, for example, we observed a reduction in H3K27ac in sgFoxp3 and sgBrd9-transduced Treg cells but not in sgPbrm1-transduced Treg cells (Figure 4H). Using dBRD9, we further recapitulated our observation that Brd9 loss resulted in diminished Foxp3 binding to chromatin at a subset of Foxp3 target sites (Figures 4I–4K Figure S6C), including at CNS2 and CNS0 (Figure 4A). To determine whether ncBAF complexes maintain chromatin accessibility for Foxp3 binding, we performed ATAC-seq on sgBrd9 and sgNT Treg cells (Figure S6G). Only 61 of 1,699 (3.5%) of Brd9-dependent Foxp3 binding sites had a significant reduction in chromatin accessibility in sgBrd9 Treg cells, suggesting that chromatin remodeling may only minimally contribute to ncBAF-dependent maintenance of Foxp3 binding.
Because Brd9 deficiency leads to reduced Foxp3 expression, we next wanted to find out whether reduced Foxp3 binding to its target regions in sgBrd9 Treg cells is due to reduced Foxp3 protein or whether Brd9 plays an additional role in facilitating Foxp3 binding to a subset of its targets. To this end, we ectopically expressed Foxp3 or MIGR (MSCV-IRES-GFP) vector control in sgNT- and sgBrd9-transduced Treg cells and performed Foxp3 ChIP-seq in these cells. Analysis of the Foxp3 ChIP-seq result showed that ectopic Foxp3 expression partially restored Foxp3 binding in sgBrd9 Treg cells but not to the level of sgNT alone or sgNT with ectopic Foxp3 expression (Figure 4L). Further analysis revealed that, although ectopic Foxp3 expression restored Foxp3 binding to a portion of Brd9-dependent Foxp3 binding sites (e.g., CD44 intergenic, Tigit intergenic, and Ctla2a promoter), binding to the majority of Brd9-dependent sites (~71%) (e.g., Icos intergenic, Ctla4 intergenic, and Ctla4 promoter) was not rescued by simply restoring Foxp3 expression (Figures S6H and S6I). These data demonstrate that Brd9 co-binds with Foxp3 at the Foxp3 locus to positively reinforce its expression. Brd9 additionally promotes Foxp3 binding and H3K27ac at a subset of Foxp3 target sites by potentiating Foxp3 expression and through epigenetic regulation at Brd9/Foxp3 co-bound sites.
Brd9 Co-regulates the Expression of Foxp3 and a Subset of Foxp3 Target Genes
Brd9 Co-regulates the Expression of Foxp3 and a Subset of Foxp3 Target Genes
(A) Volcano plot of log2 fold change RNA expression in sgFoxp3 versus sgNT Treg cells versus adjusted p value (Benjamini-Hochberg). The numbers of down and up genes are indicated and colored blue and red, respectively.
(B) Significance of enrichment of Foxp3-dependent genes in each Gene Ontology.
(C) Pie chart of Foxp3 and Brd9 binding by ChIP-seq for Foxp3-dependent genes.
(D) Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) enrichment plot for up and down genes in sgBrd9 versus sgNT compared with RNA-seq data of genes that significantly change in sgFoxp3 versus sgNT Treg cells. ES, enrichment score; NES, normalized enrichment score; FWER, family-wise error rate.
(E) As in (D) but for up and down genes in dBRD9 versus DMSO Treg cells.
(F) GSEA of the sgFoxp3 versus sgNT RNA-seq data; the plot shows the FWER p value versus the NES.
See also Figure S6 and Table S5.
Based on co-binding of Brd9 and Foxp3 at Foxp3 target sites, we assessed the effects of Brd9 ablation on transcription of Foxp3 target genes. We performed RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) in Treg cells transduced with sgFoxp3, sgBrd9, or sgNT. Consistent with Foxp3’s role as transcriptional activator and repressor, we observed 793 genes with reduced expression and 532 genes with increased expression in sgFoxp3-transduced Treg cells, which are enriched in “cytokine production,” “regulation of defense response,” and “regulation of cell adhesion” (Figures 5A and 5B). Of these, 72% were directly bound by Foxp3 in our ChIP-seq dataset, and 56% were co-bound by Foxp3 and Brd9 (Figure 5C). Based on this co-binding, we next examined whether Brd9 regulates Foxp3 target gene expression by positively affecting Foxp3 binding to its targets. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) demonstrated that sgBrd9-increased genes are significantly enriched among genes that increase upon sgFoxp3 targeting, whereas sgBrd9-decreased genes are enriched among genes that decrease in sgFoxp3 Treg cells (Figure 5D). We also performed RNA-seq for Treg cells treated with vehicle or the dBRD9 degrader and observed a similar significant enrichment for dBRD9-affected genes among the Foxp3-regulated genes (Figure 5E). To determine how Brd9 control of Foxp3 binding affects gene expression, we divided Foxp3 binding sites into quartiles based on most affected (Brd9-dependent) to least affected (Brd9-independent) by sgBrd9 transduction and compared fold changes in gene expression in sgBrd9 versus sgNT Treg cells. Indeed, gene expression of Brd9-dependent Foxp3 target genes was significantly more affected upon sgBrd9 targeting than expression of Brd9-independent Foxp3 target genes (Figure S6I). Furthermore, gene expression was significantly more affected in sgSmarcd1-transduced (an ncBAF subunit) Treg cells, but not in sgPbrm1-transduced (a PBAF subunit) Treg cells, at Brd9-dependent Foxp3 target genes (Figure S6I). Thus, ncBAF complexes regulate Foxp3 target genes through potentiation of Foxp3 binding at its target sites. Notably, the Brd9-dependent target gene sets generated from our RNA-seq data were among the most significantly enriched datasets of 9,229 immunological, Gene Ontology, and curated gene sets when analyzed against the sgFoxp3-transduced Treg expression data (Figure 5F). In addition, both datasets were significantly enriched for genes that are differentially expressed between Treg cells and conventional T cells and between Foxp3 mutant Treg cells from scurfy mice and wild-type Treg cells. These data define a role of Brd9 in Treg cells by specifically regulating the expression of Foxp3 itself and a subset of Foxp3 target genes.
The ncBAF Complex Is Required for Normal Treg Cell Suppressor Activity In Vitro and In Vivo
The ncBAF Complex Regulates Treg Cell Suppressor Function In Vitro and In Vivo
(A) In vitro suppression assay of Treg cells with sgRNA targeting of Brd9, Smarcd1, Pbrm1, and Phf10. sgNT was used as a non-targeting control (n = 3 per group; data represent ± SD).
(B) In vitro suppression assay of sgBrd9 or sgNT with ectopic expression of Foxp3 or the control vector MIGR (n = 3 per group; data represent ± SD).
(C–F) Experiment to measure function of sgNT or sgBrd9 Treg cells relative to “no Treg” cells in a T cell transfer-induced colitis model.
(C) Experimental procedure.
(D) Body weight loss.
(E) Colon histology (left) and colitis scores (right).
(F) Percentage of Foxp3+ cells in the transferred CD45.2+CD4+ Treg population at the endpoint (n = 4–7 per group; data represent mean ± SEM).
Statistical analyses were performed using unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test (ns, p ≥ 0.05; ∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗p < 0.001). See also Figure S7.
The divergent roles of ncBAF and PBAF complexes in regulating Foxp3 expression suggest that these complexes might also differentially affect Treg suppressor function. We performed sgRNA targeting of ncBAF-specific Brd9 and Smarcd1 or PBAF-specific Pbrm1 and Phf10 in Treg cells and measured their function by conducting an in vitro suppression assay. Treg cells depleted of Brd9 or Smarcd1 exhibited significantly reduced suppressor function, whereas depletion of Pbrm1 or Phf10 resulted in significantly enhanced suppressor function (Figure 6 A; Figure S7A). These data demonstrate that the opposing regulation of Foxp3 expression by ncBAF and PBAF complexes results in decreased and increased Treg suppressor activity upon ncBAF or PBAF subunit deletion, respectively. Similar to sgRNA depletion of Brd9, Treg cells treated with dBRD9 also showed significantly and specifically compromised Treg cell suppressor function in vitro (Figure S7B). We next determined whether the reduced suppressor activity in sgBrd9 Treg cells could be rescued by overexpression of Foxp3. We found that ectopic expression of Foxp3 in sgBrd9 Treg cells partially restored Treg cell suppressor activity to a level comparable with sgNT controls but still lower compared with sgNT Treg cells with ectopic Foxp3 expression (Figure 6B; Figure S7C). These results underscore the requirement for Brd9 in Foxp3 expression maintenance and optimal Treg cell suppressor activity and further demonstrate that dBRD9 reduces Treg cell suppressor activity without impairing Teff cell responses in vitro.
To test whether Brd9 also affects Treg function in vivo, we utilized a T cell transfer-induced colitis model. In this model, Rag1 −/− mice received CD45.1+ CD4+ CD25−CD45RBhi Teff cells only or Teff cells along with CD45.2+ Treg cells transduced with sgBrd9 or control sgNT (Figure 6C). Mice that received Teff cells alone lost body weight progressively because of development of colitis. Co-transfer of Treg cells transduced with sgNT protected recipient mice from weight loss, whereas co-transfer of sgBrd9-transduced Treg cells failed to protect recipients from losing weight (Figure 6D). Mice that received Brd9-depleted Treg cells showed significant colitis pathology at 7 weeks compared with mice that received control Treg cells (Figure 6E). Furthermore, Brd9 depletion also led to compromised Treg cell stability after transfer, as manifested by reduced Foxp3+ cell frequencies within the CD45.2+CD4+ transferred Treg cell population (Figure 6F). These results demonstrate that Brd9 is an essential regulator of normal Foxp3 expression and Treg cell function in a model of inflammatory bowel disease in vivo.
Targeting Brd9 in Treg Cells Improves Anti-tumor Immunity
(A) Experimental procedure to measure the function of sgNT or sgBrd9 Treg cells relative to “no Treg” cells in the MC38 tumor model.
(B) Tumor growth curve.
(C) Tumor weight at the endpoint.
(D and E) Bar graph of total CD4 T cell (D) and CD8 T cell (E) percentage in the CD45+ immune cell population.
(F and G) Bar graph of the IFN-γ+ cell percentage in CD4 T cells (F) and CD8 T cells (G).
(H) Bar graph of the CD4+GFP+Foxp3+ donor cell percentage in CD4 T cells.
(I) Ratio of CD8:Treg cells.
(J) Bar graph of the Foxp3– ex-Treg cell percentage in the transferred Treg population marked by the GFP reporter.
(K) Bar graph of Foxp3–IFN-γ+ cell percentage in the transferred Treg population (n = 5–7 per group; data represent mean ± SEM).
Statistical analyses were performed using unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test (ns, p ≥ 0.05; ∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗p < 0.001). See also Figure S7.
In addition to their beneficial role in preventing autoimmune diseases, Treg cells also function as a barrier to anti-tumor immunity. We therefore wondered whether we could exploit the compromised suppressor function shown in Brd9-deficient Treg to disrupt Treg-mediated immune suppression in tumors. We used the MC38 colorectal tumor cell line to induce cancer because of the prominent role of Treg cells in this cancer model. Rag1 −/− mice were used as recipients for adoptive transfer of Treg cell-depleted CD4 and CD8 T cells (Teff cells) only or co-transfer of Teff cells with Treg cells transduced with either sgBrd9 or sgNT. MC38 tumor cells were implanted subcutaneously on the following day (Figure 7 A). Transfer of sgNT Treg cells allowed significantly faster tumor growth compared with mice that received Teff cells only (“no Treg”) because of suppression of the anti-tumor immune response by Treg cells (Figures 7B and 7C). Furthermore, tumor growth in mice that received sgBrd9-transduced Treg cells was significantly slower than in mice that received sgNT Treg cells, consistent with our findings that Brd9 deficiency reduced Treg cell suppressor activity (Figures 7B and 7C). CD4 and CD8 T cell tumor infiltration significantly increased in mice that received sgBrd9-transduced Treg cells compared with sgNT Treg cells (Figures 7D and 7E). Additionally, the percentage of IFN-γ producing intra-tumor CD4 and CD8 T cells in mice that received sgBrd9-transduced Treg cells was significantly greater than the sgNT Treg condition and comparable with transfer of Teff cells alone (“no Treg”) (Figures 7F and 7G). Consistent with our finding that Brd9 is required for Treg cell persistence in vivo (Figure 6E), the percentage of transferred Treg cells was reduced in mice that received sgBrd9-transduced Treg cells relative to sgNT Treg cells (Figure 7H). Overall, a 2- to 3-fold increase in the ratio of CD8 T cells to Treg cells in tumors and spleen was observed under the sgBrd9 versus the sgNT condition, consistent with the enhanced anti-tumor immune response in mice that received sgBrd9-transduced Treg cells (Figure 7I). To examine whether Brd9 deficiency promotes generation of inflammatory ex-Treg cells, we measured Foxp3 and interferon γ (IFN-γ) expression within the transferred sgBrd9 or sgNT Treg cell population marked with a GFP reporter. Ablation of Brd9 led to an increase in the GFP+Foxp3– ex-Treg cell population compared with sgNT Treg cells (Figures 7J; Figure S7D). More importantly, a higher percentage of sgBrd9 ex-Treg cells produced IFN-γ compared with sgNT ex-Treg cells (Figure 7K; Figure S7D), contributing to slower tumor growth in mice that received sgBrd9 Treg cells. This experiment demonstrates that Brd9 promotes Treg lineage stability and suppressive function in MC38 tumors and that Brd9 deficiency in Treg improves anti-tumor immunity in this context.
Discussion
In this study, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR screen to identify positive and negative regulators of Foxp3 expression in mouse natural Treg cells. Among positive regulators, we identified Cbfb and Runx3, consistent with a requirement for Cbf-β and Runx3 in Foxp3 expression and Foxp3-dependent target gene expression. Among the positive regulators, we discovered subunits from two chromatin remodeling complexes, the Brd9-containing ncBAF and SAGA complexes. Independent validation and functional assays demonstrated an essential role of the ncBAF complex and SAGA complex in Foxp3 expression and Treg cell suppressor function. A recent study using a CRISPR screen of 489 nuclear factors also identified Usp22, a subunit of the SAGA complex, as a positive regulator of Foxp3 expression. The ncBAF subunits Brd9, Gltscr1, Gltscr1l, and Smarcd1 were not identified in this study because of exclusion of these genes from the sgRNA library.
Our screens also confirmed several known negative regulators of Foxp3, including the DNA methyltransferase Dnmt1 and the ubiquitin ligase Stub1. Additionally, we identified multiple negative regulators of the mTOR pathway as Foxp3 negative regulators (Tsc2, Flcn, Ddit4, Sesn2, and Nprl2), confirming an essential role of mTOR in homeostasis and function of activated Treg cells. Among negative Foxp3 regulators, we uncovered genes encoding regulators of RNA metabolism, which have no previously reported function in Foxp3 expression. For example, Mettl3 and Mettl14 form a methyltransferase complex that is essential for m6A methylation of RNA, which is recognized as an important regulatory mechanism for a wide range of biological processes, including RNA stability, protein translation, stem cell self-renewal, cell lineage determination, and oncogenesis. Our screen suggests a potential role of RNA m6A methylation in post-transcriptional regulation of Foxp3. Our genome-wide screen provides the first comprehensive picture of the complex regulatory network controlling Foxp3 expression and reveals previously unknown pathways and factors that warrant further investigation.
Following identification of SWI/SNF subunit genes among Foxp3 regulators, we endeavored to characterize the roles of the three SWI/SNF-related complexes by deleting subunits unique to each of the ncBAF, BAF, and PBAF complexes. We observed specific and divergent roles of the ncBAF and PBAF complexes in regulating Foxp3 expression in Treg cells. In contrast, deletion of BAF-specific subunits had a slight but non-significant effect on Foxp3 expression. Nevertheless, several SWI/SNF core subunits were recovered in our screen, among genes that regulate Treg cell contraction, suggesting that BAF complexes may regulate Treg cell activation or proliferation in response to the TCR stimulation used to activate and culture Treg cells in our screen. This is consistent with the fact that genetic deletion of Smarca4 in Treg cells results in development of a fatal inflammatory disorder reminiscent of Foxp3 mutant scurfy mice. Although Treg cell development and Foxp3 expression are normal in Smarca4-deficient Treg cells, Treg cell function is nevertheless compromised because of impaired activation of TCR target genes; for example, chemokine receptor genes. Thus, deletion of Smarca4 or other BAF complex subunits likely results in overall defects in Treg cell fitness, whereas deletion of ncBAF subunits appears to have a selective effect on Foxp3 expression and its target genes. Mechanistically, we found that the ncBAF complex co-bound and cooperated with Foxp3 to potentiate its binding to the CNS2 and CNS0 enhancers of the Foxp3 locus. In addition to the Foxp3 locus itself, our ChIP-seq analysis revealed that ncBAF also colocalized with Foxp3 at regulatory elements in a subset of Foxp3 target genes to regulate their gene expression. Thus, we favor a model where reduced Foxp3 expression and loss of epigenetic regulation by ncBAF complexes upon sgBrd9 transduction results in less Foxp3 binding at Brd9/Foxp3 co-bound sites, affecting Foxp3 target gene expression.
Finally, we tested the in vivo relevance of our findings by disrupting the ncBAF subunit Brd9 in Treg cells in mouse models of inflammatory bowel disease and cancer. Brd9 deficiency in Treg cells weakened their suppressor function in a model of T cell-induced colitis, leading to exacerbated disease progression. In the context of cancer, we found that transfer of Brd9-deficient Treg cells failed to restrict anti-tumor immune responses in the MC38 cell induced cancer model, leading to slower tumor growth. Currently, there is a concerted effort to develop compounds targeting a number of SWI/SNF complex subunits to modulate their function. Our data show that bromodomain-directed degradation of Brd9 by dBRD9 recapitulated the effects of Brd9 genetic deletion, suggesting that the ncBAF complex can be targeted with small molecules to control Foxp3 expression and Treg cell function. Thus, through an unbiased screen of Foxp3 regulators, we identify proteins that can potentially be targeted to manipulate Treg cell homeostasis and function in autoimmune diseases and cancer.
Limitations of Study
Future studies are geared toward understanding the mechanism by which ncBAF facilitates expression of Foxp3 and its target genes. Although coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) restrictions prevented us from directly repeating our analysis of Foxp3 ChIP binding in sgBrd9-transduced Treg cells, additional evidence comparing transduction of sgBrd9 versus sgNT in MIGR-transduced Treg cells confirmed our finding that Brd9 promotes Foxp3 binding to the Foxp3 locus and a subset of its target sites. One possibility is that ncBAF complexes maintain chromatin accessibility for Foxp3 binding; however, we detected minimal changes in chromatin accessibility upon sgBrd9 targeting by ATAC-seq. We speculate that alternative methods for mapping nucleosome dynamics and/or chromatin accessibility are necessary to determine the role of chromatin remodeling in this setting. It should also be noted that the methods employed to transduce primary Treg cells for the screen and validation analyses involve activating Treg cells and culturing them in vitro. Thus, Treg cell-specific conditional deletion approaches will be necessary to further study the functional relevance of candidates identified in this screen. Finally, we utilized adoptive transfer of Treg cells into Rag1 –/– mice to test the in vivo function of sgBrd9 Treg cells in models of colitis and tumor immunity. Although this approach is commonly used, we acknowledge that the rapid homeostatic proliferation of Treg cells in recipient mice could impose additional influence on their immune suppressor function.
STAR★Methods
Key Resources Table
REAGENT or RESOURCE	SOURCE	IDENTIFIER	 	Antibodies	 		 	Anti-CD4-Alexa fluor 700	Thermo Fisher	Cat#56-0042-82; RRID: AB_494000	 	Anti-CD4-PerCP-Cy5.5	TONBO	Cat#65-0042-U100; RRID: AB_2621876	 	Anti-CD8-PE	Thermo Fisher	Cat#12-0081-85; RRID: AB_465532	 	Anti-CD8-BV510	Biolegend	Cat#100752; RRID: AB_2563057	 	Anti-CD45.1-BV605	Biolegend	Cat#110735; RRID:AB_11124743	 	Anti-CD45.2-Alexa 700	Biolegend	Cat#109822; RRID:AB_493731	 	Anti-Foxp3-eFluor 450	Thermo Fisher	Cat#48-5773-82; RRID:AB_1518812	 	Anti-NGFR-PE	Biolegend	Cat#345106; RRID:AB_2152647	 	Anti-NGFR-APC	Biolegend	Cat#345108; RRID:AB_10645515	 	Anti-Thy1.1-PE	Thermo Fisher	Cat#12-0900-83; RRID:AB_465774	 	Anti-CD44-BV650	Biolegend	Cat#103049; RRID:AB_2562600	 	Anti-CD62L-BV605	Biolegend	Cat#104438; RRID:AB_2563058	 	Anti-IFNg-APC	Thermo Fisher	Cat#17-7311-82; RRID:AB_469504	 	Ghost Viability Dye Red 780	TONBO	Cat#13-0865-T100	 	Anti-Foxp3	In-house	n/a	 	Anti-BRG1/SMARCA4	Abcam	Cat#110641; RRID:AB_10861578	 	Anti-BAF155/SMARCC1	Santa Cruz	Cat#sc-10756; RRID:AB_2191997	 	Anti-BAF47/SMARCB1	Santa Cruz	Cat#sc-166165; RRID:AB_2270651	 	Anti-Brd9	Active Motif	Cat#61537; RRID:AB_2614970	 	Anti-Pbrm1	Bethyl	Cat#A301-591A; RRID:AB_1078808	 	Anti-Phf10	Thermo Fisher	Cat#PA5-30678; RRID:AB_2548152	 	Anti-Arid1a	Santa Cruz	Cat#sc-32761; RRID:AB_673396	 	Anti-Histone H3K27ac	Abcam	Cat#ab4729; RRID:AB_2118291	 	Anti-IgG	Cell Signaling	Cat#2729S; RRID:AB_1031062	 	Anti-mouse secondary	Thermo Fisher	Cat#A21058; RRID:AB_2535724	 	Anti-rabbit secondary	Thermo Fisher	Cat#SA535571; RRID:AB_2556775	 	Anti-mouse IL2	BIO-X-CELL	Cat#BE0043 RRID:AB_1107702	 		 	Recombinant DNA	 		 	pSIR-dsRed-Express2	Addgene	Cat#51135; RRID:Addgene_51135	 	pSIRG-NGFR	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-GFP	This paper	n/a	 	pCL-Eco	Addgene	Cat#12371; RRID:Addgene_12371	 	lentiCRISPRv2-Brie library	Addgene	Cat#73632	 	pSIRG-NGFR-Brie library	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgFoxp3 Target: TCTACCCACAGGGATCAATG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgCbfb Target: GCCTTGCAGATTAAGTACAC	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgDnmt1 Target: TAATGTGAACCGGTTCACAG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgArid1a Target: GCAGCTGCGAAGATATCGGG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgArid1a-2 Target: TACCCAAATATGAATCAAGG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG- NGFR-sgArid1b Target: TGAGTGCAAAACTGAGCGCG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgArid1b-2 Target: CAGAACCCCAACATATAGCG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgDpf1 Target: TCTTCTACCTCGAGATCATG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgDpf2 Target: GAAGATACGCCAAAGCGTCG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgPbrm1 Target: AAAACACTTGCATAACGATG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgPbrm1-2 Target: CAATGCCAGGCACTACAATG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgArid2 Target: ACTTGCAGTAAATTAGCTCG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgBrd7 Target: CAGGAGGCAAGCTAACACGG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgPhf10 Target: GTTGCCGACAGACCGAACGA	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgBrd9 Target: ATTAACCGGTTTCTCCCGGG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgBrd9-2 Target: GGAACACTGCGACTCAGAGG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgGltscr1 Target: GTTCTGTGTAAAATCACACT	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgGltscr1l Target: ATGGCTTTATGCAACACGTG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgSmarcd1 Target: CAATCCGGCTAAGTCGGACG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgEny2 Target: AGAGCTAAATTAATTGAGTG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgAtxn7l3 Target: GCAGCCGAATCGCCAACCGT	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgUsp22 Target: GCCATCGACCTGATGTACGG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgCcdc101 Target: CCAGGTTTCCCGATCCAGAG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgTada3 Target: GAAGGTCTGTCCCCGCTACA	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgTada1 Target: TTTCCTTCTCGACACAACTG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgTaf6l Target: TCATGAAACACACCAAACGA	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgSupt20 Target: TTAGTAGTCAATCTGTACCC	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgSupt5 Target: GATGACCGATGTACTCAAGG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-NGFR-sgNT Target: AAAAAGTCCGCGATTACGTC	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-GFP-sgBrd9 Target: ATTAACCGGTTTCTCCCGGG	This paper	n/a	 	pSIRG-GFP-sgNT Target: AAAAAGTCCGCGATTACGTC	This paper	n/a	 	MSCV-IRES-GFP (MIGR)	Addgene	Cat#27490; RRID:Addgene_27490	 	MIGR-Foxp3	The laboratory of Alexander Rudensky	n/a	 		 	Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins	 		 	Human IL-2	Peprotech	Cat#200-02	 	Mouse IL-2	Biolegend	Cat#575408	 	dBRD9	Tocris	Cat#6606	 	NEBuilder HIFI assembly	NEB	Cat#E2621S	 	BbsI-HF	NEB	Cat#R3539S	 	Q5 High-Fidelity DNA polymerase	NEB	Cat#M0491	 	Ficoll-Paque 1.084	GE Health	Cat#17-5446-02	 	FuGENE 6 HD transfection reagent	Promega	Cat#E2311	 	Foxp3 Fix/Perm buffer	Thermo Fisher	Cat#00-5523-00	 	CellTrace Violet	Thermo Fisher	Cat#C34571	 		 	Cell Lines	 		 	HEK293T	ATCC	Cat#CRL-11268	 	MC38	The laboratory of Susan Keach	n/a	 		 	Mouse Strains	 		 	Rosa26-LSL-Cas9 mice	The Jackson Laboratory	Cat#024857	 	Foxp3Thy1.1 reporter mice		n/a	 	C57BL.6 Ly5.1+ congenic mice	The Jackson Laboratory	Cat#002014	 	Rag1−/− mice	The Jackson Laboratory	Cat#002216	 		 	Software and Algorithms	 		 	MAGeCK	https://sourceforge.net/p/mageck/wiki/Home/; 	n/a	 	MAGeCK-VISPR	https://bitbucket.org/liulab/mageck-vispr; 	n/a	 	EnhancedVolcano R script	https://github.com/kevinblighe/EnhancedVolcano	n/a	 	sgRNA distribution histogram R script		n/a	 	Metascape		n/a	 	HOMER	http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/	n/a	 	Cluster 3.0	http://bonsai.hgc.jp/∼mdehoon/software/cluster/software.htm	n/a	 	Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)	https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/index.jsp; 	n/a	 	Cutadapt	http://cutadapt.readthedocs.io/en/stable/	n/a	 	Samtools	http://htslib.org; 	n/a	 	Picard	http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard	n/a	 	BWA Aligner	http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net; 	n/a	 	Macs2	http://pypi.org/project/MACS2	n/a
Lead Contact and Materials Availability
Lead Contact
Additional information and requests for resource and/or reagent should be addressed to Diana Hargreaves (dhargreaves@salk.edu) or Ye Zheng (yzheng@salk.edu).
Materials Availability
The pSIRG-NGFR vector and the pSIRG-NGFR-Brie sgRNA library are available from the Lead Contact with a completed Material Transfer Agreement (MTA).
Data and Code Availability
RNA-seq, ChIP-seq, and ATAC-seq data that support the findings of this study have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus under the accession code GEO Database: GSE129846 [https://www.ncbi.nlm.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE129846]. The current study did not generate any code.
Experimental Model and Subject Details
Mice
C57BL/6 Rosa-Cas9/Foxp3Thy1.1 mice were generated by crossing Rosa26-LSL-Cas9 mice (The Jackson Laboratory #024857) with Foxp3Thy1.1 reporter mice. Male Cas9/Foxp3Thy1.1 mice at 8-12 weeks age were used to isolate Treg cells for the CRISPR screen, and no gender preference was given for other experiments. C57BL.6 Ly5.1+ congenic mice and Rag1−/− mice purchased from the Jackson Laboratory were used for Treg suppression assay and adoptive T cell transfer in colitis and tumor models. All mice were bred and housed in the specific pathogen-free facilities at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies and were conducted under the regulation of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) and institutional guidelines.
Method Details
Retroviral vectors and sgRNA library construction
Self-inactivating retroviral vector pSIRG-NGFR was generated by modifying pSIR-dsRed-Express2 (Addgene #51135), which enables us to clone sgRNA as efficient as lentiCRISPRv2, to enrich transduced cells via magnetic beads isolation, and to perform intracellular staining without losing transduced reporter marker. We first mutated all BbsI sites in pSIR-dsRed-Express2, then inserted a sgRNA expressing cassette containing the U6 promoter, guide RNA scaffold and a 500bp filler embedded with BbsI cloning site. The dsRed cassette was replaced by cDNA sequence of human nerve growth factor receptor (NGFR) with truncated intracellular domain. We also generated pSIRG vector with GFP (pSIRG-GFP) for the purpose of T cells transfer in tumor study, minimizing potential immune rejection. The pSIRG-GFP was generated by cutting pSIRG-NGFR with XcmI to remove NGFR cassette and replaced by GFP cDNA by Gibson cloning. For cloning single guide RNA into the pSIRG vector, an annealed sgRNA oligos can be directly inserted into BbsI-digested pSIRG-NGFR by T4 ligation similar to the cloning method utilized by lentiCRISPRv2. To create a pooled sgRNA library in pSIRG-NGFR, we first amplified sgRNA sequences from an optimized mouse CRISPR sgRNA library lentiCRISPRv2-Brie (Addgene #73632). A total of eight 50 μL PCR reactions were performed to maximize coverage of sgRNA complexity. Each 50 μL PCR reaction contained Q5 High-Fidelity DNA polymerase and buffer (NEB #M0491), 15ng of lentiCRISPRv2-Brie, and targeted primers (Forward: GGCTTTATATATCTTGTGGAAAGGACGAAACACCG, Reverse: CTAGCCTTATTTTAACTTGCTATTTCTAGCTCTAAAAC). PCR was performed at 98°C denature, 67°C annealing, 72°C extension for 12 cycles. The sgRNA library amplicons were then combined and separated in 2% agarose gel, and purified by the QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (QIAGEN #28704). The purified sgRNA amplicons was inserted into the BbsI-digested pSIRG-NGFR by NEBuilder HIFI assembly (NEB #E2621S). The sgRNA representative of the retroviral CRISPR library (pSIRG-NGFR-Brie) was validated by deep sequencing and comparing to the original lentiCRISPRvs-Brie. The coverage of the new pSIRG-NGFR sgRNA library was evaluated by the PinAPL-Py program (; see Extended Data Figure 1).
T cell isolation and culture
For large scale Treg culture, we first expanded Treg in Rosa-Cas9/Foxp3Thy1.1 mice by injecting IL-2:IL-2 antibody immune complex according protocol described in. Spleen and lymph node Treg cells were labeled with PE-conjugated Thy1.1 antibody and isolated by magnetic selection using anti-PE microbeads (Mitenyl #130-048-801). All isolated Treg cells were activated by plate bound anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies and cultured with X-VIVO 20 media (LONZA #04-448Q) supplemented by 1X Pen/Strep, 1X Sodium pyruvate, 1X HEPES, 1X GlutaMax, 55 μM beta-mercaptoethanol in the presence of IL-2 at 500 U/mL. For experiments with Brd9 degradation, Treg cells were treated at day 0 with 2.5 μM dBRD9 (Tocris #6606) and cultured for four days for RNA- and ChIP-seq and 0.16-10 μM treated at day 0 and cultured dBRD9 for four days for Foxp3 MFI, cell viability and cell proliferation assays. Live cells were enriched by Ficoll-Paque 1.084 (GE Health 17-5446-02) for RNA-seq and ChIP-seq.
Retroviral production and T cell transduction
HEK293T cells were seeded in 6-wells plate at 0.5 million cells per 2mL DMEM media supplemented by 10% FBS, 1% Pen/Strep, 1X GlutaMax, 1X Sodium Pyruvate, 1X HEPES, and 55 μM beta-mercaptoethanol. One day later, cells from each well was transfected with 1.2 μg of targeting vector pSIRG-NGFR and 0.8 μg of packaging vector pCL-Eco (Addgene, #12371) by using 4 μL of FuGENE HD transfection reagent (Promega #E2311) according manufactured protocol. Cell culture media was replaced by 3 mL fresh DMEM complete media at 24 hours and 48 hours after transfection. The retroviral supernatant was collected at 48 and 72 hours post transfection for T cell infection. For experiments with CRISPR sgRNA targeting, Cas9+ Treg cells were first seeded in 24-wells plate coated with CD3 and CD28 antibodies. At 24 hour post-activation, 70% of Treg media from each well was replaced by retroviral supernatant, supplemented with 4 μg/mL Polybrene (Milipore # TR-1003-G), and spun in a benchtop centrifuge at 1,258 x g for 90 minutes at 32°C. After centrifugation, Treg media was replaced with fresh media supplemented with IL-2 and cultured for another three days. Transduced cells were analyzed for Foxp3 and cytokine expression in eBioscience Fix/Perm buffer (eBioscience #00-5523-00) using flow cytometry. Transduced NGFR+ cells were FACS-sorted for subsequent RNA- and ChIP-seq experiments.
Genome-wide CRISPR screen in Treg
Approximately 360 million Treg cells isolated from Rosa-Cas9/Foxp3Thy1.1 mice were used for the Treg screen. On day 0, Treg cells were seeded at 1x106 cells/mL into 24-wells plate coated with anti-CD3/28 and cultured with X-VIVO complete media with IL-2 (500 U/ml). On day 1, sgRNA retroviral library transduction was performed with a MOI < 0.2. On day 3, approximately 4 million (~50X coverage) NGFR+ transduced cells were collected in three replicates as the starting state sgRNA input. Treg cells reached confluence on day 4. NGFR+ transduced cells were isolated via magnetic selection by anti-PE beads (Mitenyl #130-048-801), and then plated onto new 24-wells plates coated with anti-CD3/CD28, and cultured in X-VIVO complete media with IL-2 (500 U/ml). On day 6, approximately 4 million NGFR+ transduced cells were collected in three replicates as the ending state sgRNA output. The remaining cells were fixed, permeabilized, and stained for intracellular Foxp3. Approximately 2 million Foxp3hi (top 20%) and 2 million Foxp3lo (bottom 20%) cell populations were sorted in three replicates by a FACS Aria cell sorter for genomic DNA extraction and library construction.
Preparation of sgRNA amplicons for Next-Generation Sequencing
To extract genomic DNA, we first lysed cells with homemade digestion buffer (100mM NaCl, 10mM Tris, 25mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS, 0.1mg/mL Proteinase K) overnight in 50°C. On the following day, the lysed sample was mixed with phenol: chloroform: isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1, v/v) in 1:1 ratio, and spun at 6000rpm for 15 min at room temperature. The supernatant containing genomic DNA was transferred into a new tube and mixed with twice volume of 100% ethanol, then spun at 12,500 rpm for 5 min in room temperature to precipitate DNA. Supernatant was removed, and the precipitated DNA was dissolved in ddH2O. DNA concentration was measured by Nanodrop. To generate sgRNA amplicons from extracted genomic DNA, we used a two-step PCR protocol which was adopted from the protocol published by. We performed eight 50 μL PCR reactions containing 2 μg genomic DNA, NEB Q5 polymerase, and buffer, and targeted primers (Forward: GGCTTTATATATCTTGTGGAAAGGACGAAACACCG, Reverse: CTAGCCTTATTTTAACTTGCTATTTCTAGCTCTAAAAC). PCR was performed at 98°C denature, 70°C annealing, 15 s extension for 20 cycles. The products from the first PCR were pooled together, and purified by AMPure XP SPRI beads according to manufacturer’s protocol, and quantified by Qubit dsDNA HS assay. For the second round PCR, we performed eight 50 μL PCR reactions containing 2 ng purified 1st round PCR product, barcoded primer (see primer set from; Priming site of reverse primer was changed to CTTCCCTCGACGAATTCCCAAC), NEB Q5 polymerase, and buffer. PCR was performed at 98°C denature, 70°C annealing, 15 s extension for 12 cycles. The 2nd round PCR products were pooled, purified by AMPure XP SPRI beads, quantified by Qubit dsDNA HS assay, and sequenced by NEXTSeq sequencer at single end 75 bp (SE75).
In vitro Treg suppression assay
Treg cells were transduced by retrovirus expressing sgRNA targeting gene of interest and cultured in X-VIVO complete media supplemented with IL-2 (500 U/ml). Four days after transduction, transduced cells were sorted and mixed with FACS sorted CD45.1+ naive CD4 T cells (CD4+ CD25– CD44lo CD62Lhi) labeled with CellTrace Violet (Thermo Fisher Scientific #C34571) in different ratio in the presence of irradiated T cell depleted spleen cells as antigen-presenting cells (APC). Three days later, Treg suppression function was measured by the percentage of non-dividing cells within the CD45.1+ effector T cell population. For dBRD9 treatment experiment, dBRD9 was first dissolved in DMSO (10 mM stock) and added into Treg:Teff:APC mixture at 2.5 μM. For Foxp3 overexpression rescue experiment, Treg cells were first transduced with sgNT or sgBrd9 at 24 hour post-activation, and then transduced with MIGR empty vector or MIGR-Foxp3 at 48 hour post-activation. Double transduced Treg cells were FACS sorted on day 4 based on NGFR+ and GFP+ markers and then mixed with CellTrace labeled effector T cells in the presence of APC. Treg suppression readout was measured after three days of co-culture.
Adoptive T cells transfer-induced colitis model
Treg cells were transduced by retrovirus expressing sgRNA targeting gene of interest, and cultured in X-VIVO complete media and IL-2 (500 U/ml). Four days after transduction, the NGFR+ transduced Treg cells were FACS sorted before transferred into recipient mice. To induce colitis, 2 million effector T cells (CD45.1+ CD4+ CD25– CD45RBhi) and 1 million sgRNA transduced Treg cells (CD45.2+ CD4+ Thy1.1+ NGFR+) were mixed together and transferred into Rag1 –/– recipient mice. The body weight of recipient mice was monitored weekly for signs of wasting symptoms. Mice were harvested 7 weeks after T cell transfer. Spleens were used for profiling immune cell populations by FACS. Colons were collected for histopathological analysis.
Adoptive T cells transfer and MC38 tumor model
Similar to the “Adoptive T cells transfer-induced colitis model,” Treg cells were activated in vitro and transduced with pSIRG-GFP expressing sgNT or sgBrd9. Four days after transduction, the GFP+ transduced Treg were FACS sorted. Concurrently, Treg depleted CD4 and CD8 T cells isolated from Rosa-Cas9/Foxp3Thy1.1 mice were used as effector T cells. A total of 1 million pSIRG-sgRNA transduced GFP+ Treg cells, 1 million effector CD8 T cells, and 2 million Treg-depleted CD4 T cells were mixed and transferred into Rag1 –/– recipient mice. on the following day, mice were implanted with 0.5 million MC38 cells (a kind gift from the laboratory of Dr. Susan Kaech) by subcutaneous injection on the flank of mouse. When palpable tumor appeared, tumor size was measured every two day by electronic calipers (volume = width2 x length x 0.5). At the end point, spleen and tumor were collected for immune profiling. For tumor processing, tumor tissues were minced into small pieces and digested with 0.5 mg/mL Collagenase IV (Sigma #C5138) and DNAase I (Roche #4716728001) for 20 minutes and passed through 0.75 μm cell strainer to collect single cell suspension. Isolated cells were stimulated with PMA/Ionomycin and Golgi plug for 5 hours, and then were subjected to Foxp3 and cytokines staining with eBioscience Fix/Perm buffer (eBioscience #00-5523-00).
Nuclear protein extraction
Nuclear lysates were collected from Treg cells following a revised Dignam protocol. After cellular swelling in Buffer A (10 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl) supplemented with 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 1 μM pepstatin, 10 μM leupeptin and 10 μM chymostatin, cells were lysed by homogenization using a 21-gauge needle with six to eight strokes. If lysis remained incomplete, cells were treated with 0.025 - 0.05% Igepal-630 for ten minutes on ice prior to nuclei collection. Nuclei were spun down at 700 x g for five minutes then resuspended in Buffer C (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 20% glycerol, 420 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA) supplemented with 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 1 μM pepstatin, 10 μM leupeptin and 10 μM chymostatin. After thirty minutes of end-to-end rotation at 4°C, the sample was clarified at 21,100 x g for ten minutes. Supernatant was collected, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in the −80°C freezer.
Co-Immunoprecipitation
Nuclear lysates were thawed on ice then diluted with two-thirds of original volume of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 0.3% NP-40, EDTA, MgCl2 to bring down the NaCl concentration. Proteins were quantified using Biorad DC Protein Assay (Cat #5000112) according to manufacturer’s instructions. For the co-IP reaction, 200-300 μg of proteins were incubated with antibody against normal IgG, Smarca4, Brd9, Arid1a or Phf10 overnight at 4°C, with end-to-end rotation. Precipitated proteins were bound to 50:50 Protein A: Protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen) for one to two hours and washed extensively with IP wash buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.5% Triton X-100). Proteins were eluted in SDS-PAGE loading solution with boiling for five minutes and analyzed by western blotting.
Western blot
Protein samples were run on 4%–12% Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies). After primary antibody incubation which is typically done overnight at 4°C, blots were probed with 1:20,000 dilution of fluorescently-labeled secondary antibodies in 2% BSA in PBST (1X Phospho-buffered saline with 0.1% Tween-20) for an hour at room temperature (RT). Fluorescent images were developed using Odyssey and analyzed using Image Studio 2. Protein quantitation was performed by first normalizing the measured fluorescence values of the proteins of interest against the loading control (TBP) then normalizing against the control sample (vehicle treated).
RNA-seq sample preparation
RNA from 1-3 × 106 cells was extracted and purified with TRIzol reagent (Thermo Fisher) according to manufacturer’s instructions. RNA-seq libraries were prepared using Illumina TruSeq Stranded mRNA kit following manufacturer’s instructions with 5 μg of input RNA.
ChIP-seq sample preparation
Treg cells were collected and cross-linked first in 3 mM disuccinimidyl glutarate (DSG) in 1X PBS for thirty minutes then in 1% formaldehyde for another ten minutes, both at RT, for chromatin binding protein ChIP or in 1% formaldehyde only for histone modification ChIP. After quenching the excess cross-linker with a final concentration of 125 mM glycine, the cells were washed in 1X PBS, pelleted, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C. Cell pellets were thawed on ice and incubated in lysis solution (50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 8, 140 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.5% NP40, 0.25% Triton X-100) for ten minutes. The isolated nuclei were washed with wash solution (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, 200 mM NaCl) and shearing buffer (0.1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8) then sheared in a Covaris E229 sonicator for ten minutes to generate DNA fragments between ~200-1000 base pairs (bp). After clarification of insoluble material by centrifugation, the chromatin was immunoprecipitated overnight at 4°C with antibodies against Foxp3, Smarca4, Brd9, Phf10 or H3K27ac. The next day, the antibody bound DNA was incubated with Protein A+G Dynabeads (Invitrogen) in ChIP buffer (50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% DOC, 0.1% SDS), washed and treated with Proteinase K and RNase A. Cross-linking was reversed by incubation at 55°C for two and a half hours. Purified ChIP DNA was used for library generation (NuGen Ovation Ultralow Library System V2) according to manufacturer’s instructions for subsequent sequencing.
ATAC-seq sample preparation
ATAC-seq was performed according to previously published protocol. Briefly, Tregs transduced with either sgNT or sgBrd9 were subjected to Ficoll gradient purification to remove dead cells and ensure capture of cells that were 99% viable. 50,000 Treg cells were collected in duplicates per genotype and washed first with cold 1X PBS then with Resuspension buffer (RSB; 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2). Cells were lysed in 50 μL of RSB supplemented with 0.1% NP40, 0.01% Digitonin and 0.1% Tween 20 for 3 minutes on ice then diluted with 1 mL of RSB with 0.1% Tween 20. Nuclei were isolated by centrifugation at 500 x g for ten minutes then resuspended in 50 μL of transposition mix (25 μL 2x Illumina Transposase buffer, 2.5 μL Illumina Tn5 Transposase, 16.5 μL PBS, 0.5 μL 1% Digitonin, 0.5 μL 10% Tween 20, 5 μL water) for 30 minutes at 37C in a thermomixer with shaking at 1,000 rpm. Reactions were cleaned up with QIAGEN Min-Elute columns. ATAC-seq libraries were prepared as described previously. Briefly, purified DNA was ligated with adapters and amplified to a target concentration of 20 μL at 4 nM. Libraries were size selected using AMPure XP beads (Beckman) and sequenced using NextSeq for paired end 42 bp (PE42) sequencing.
Quantification and Statistical Analysis
Data analysis of pooled CRISPR screen
The screening hit identification and quality control was performed by MAGeCK-VISPR program. The abundance of sgRNA from a sample fastq file was first quantified by MAGeCK “Count” module to generate a read count table. For hit calling, we used MAGeCK “test” module to generate a gene-ranking table that reporting RRA gene ranking score, p value, and log2 fold change. The size factor for normalization was adjusted according to1000 non-targeting control assigned in the screen library. All sgRNAs that are zero read were removed from RRA analysis. The log2 fold change of a gene was calculated from a mean of 4 sgRNA targeting per gene. The scatterplots showing the screen results were generated by using the R script EnhancedVolcano (https://github.com/kevinblighe/EnhancedVolcano). The R script that generated the sgRNA distribution histogram was provided by E. Shifrut and A. Marson (UCSF). A gene list from Foxp3 regulators (either positive or negative) without affecting cell proliferation was subjected to Gene Ontology analysis using Metascape. Genes were analyzed for enrichment for Functional Set, Pathway, and Structural Complex.
Colon histopathological analysis
Histopathological analysis was performed in a blinded manner and scored using the following criteria. Eight parameters were used that include (i) the degree of inflammatory infiltrate in the LP (0-3); (ii) Goblet cell loss (0–2); (iii) reactive epithelial hyperplasia/atypia with nuclear changes (0–3); (iv) the number of IELs in the epithelial crypts (0–3); (v) abnormal crypt architecture (distortion, branching, atrophy, crypt loss) (0–3); (vi) number of crypt abscesses (0–2); (vii) mucosal erosion to frank ulcerations (0–2) and (viii) submucosal spread to transmural involvement (0-2). The severity of lesion was scored independently in 3 regions (proximal, middle and distal colon) over a maximal score of 20. The overall colitis score was based as the average of each regional score (maximal score of 20).
RNA-seq analysis
Single-end 50 bp reads were aligned to the mouse genome mm10 using STAR alignment tool (V2.5). RNA expression was quantified as raw integer counts using analyzeRepeats.pl in HOMER using the following parameters: -strand both -count exons -condenseGenes -noadj. To identify differentially expressed genes, we performed getDiffExpression.pl in HOMER, which uses the DESeq2 R package to calculate the biological variation within replicates. Cut-offs were set at log2 FC = 0.585 and FDR at 0.05 (Benjamin-Hochberg). Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed with the mean of transcript per million (TPM) values using Cluster 3.0 with the following filter parameters: at least one observation with absolute value equal or greater than two and gene vector of four. TPM values were log transformed then centered on the mean.
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
GSEA software was used to perform the analyses with the following parameters: number of permutations = 1000; enrichment statistic = weighted; and metric for ranking of genes = difference of classes (Input RNA-seq data was log-transformed). For Figure 5G, input RNA-seq data contained the normalized log-transformed reads of the 1,325 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in sgFoxp3/sgNT Treg cells. The compiled gene list included GSEA Gene Ontology, Immunological Signature, Curated Gene, and the up and down DEGs in sgBrd9/sgNT Treg cells. The resulting normalized enrichment scores and FWER p values were combined to generate the graph.
ChIP-seq analysis
Single-end 50 bp or paired-end 42 bp reads were aligned to mouse genome mm10 using STAR alignment tool (V2.5). ChIP-Seq peaks were called using findPeaks within HOMER using parameters for histone (-style histone) or transcription factor (-style factor) (Christopher Benner, HOMER; http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/index.html; 2018). Peaks were called when enriched > two-fold over input and > four-fold over local tag counts, with FDR 0.001 (Benjamin-Hochberg). For histone ChIP, peaks within a 1000 bp range were stitched together to form regions. Differential ChIP peaks were found by merging peaks from control and experiment groups and called using getDiffExpression.pl with fold change ≥ 1.5 or ≤ −1.5, Poisson p value < 0.0001.
For k-means clustering analysis in Figure S6D, Foxp3 ChIP-seq tags were quantified at the sites that significantly lose Foxp3 binding in sgBrd9, MIGR compared to sgNT, MIGR using the annotatePeaks.pl command in HOMER with -size given. Log2FC values were calculated for sgBrd9, MIGR/sgNT, MIGR and sgBrd9, Foxp3/sgNT, MIGR. k-means clustering was performed using Gene Cluster 3.0 and visualized using Java TreeView.
For gene expression analysis in Figure S6F, Foxp3 ChIP-seq tags were quantified at the union of sites bound by Foxp3 in sgNT and sgBrd9 using the annotatePeaks.pl command in HOMER with size -given and each site was annotated to a gene by mapping to the nearest TSS. Sites were ranked from least to largest Foxp3 ChIP-seq Log2FC in sgBrd9 versus sgNT and divided into quartiles. Gene expression for the genes in the top and bottom quartiles (Brd9-dependent and -independent, respectively) was then plotted using RNA-seq data from Treg cells transduced with sgBrd9, sgSmarcd1, or sgPbrm1 compared to sgNT. Statistical analyses were performed using unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test (ns: p ≥ 0.05, ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01) in Graphpad Prism.
Motif analysis
Sequences within 200 bp of peak centers were compared to motifs in the HOMER database using the findMotifsGenome.pl command using default fragment size and motif length parameters. Random GC content-matched genomic regions were used as background. Enriched motifs are statistically significant motifs in input over background by a p value of less than 0.05. P values were calculated using cumulative binomial distribution.
ATAC-seq analysis
ATAC-seq data analysis used the following tools and versions: cutadapt (v2.4), samtools (v1.9), Picard (v1.7.1), BWA (v0.7.12), macs2 (v2.1.2), and HOMER (v4.11). Paired end 42 bp reads were trimmed using cutadapt to remove Nextera adaptor sequences then aligned to the reference mouse genome mm10 using BWA. The following were filtered out using Picard and samtools: duplicate reads, mitochondrial reads, low quality reads (Q < 20), and improperly paired or unpaired reads. Quality was assessed by calculating Fraction of Reads In Peaks (FRIP Score) which were > 40% for all samples. TSS enrichment was determined using mm10 Refseq TSSs. Broad and narrow peaks were called using macs2 using the following parameters:–slocal 1000 –qvalue 0.05 -f BAMPE. Differentially accessible sites were determined using getDifferentialPeaksReplicates.pl command in HOMER using the union of peaks in sgNT and sgBrd9 with the following parameters: edgeR, fold change cutoff 1.5, adjusted p value < 0.05.
Data and Software Availability
Data availability
RNA-seq, ChIP-seq, and ATAC-seq data that support the findings of this study have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus under the accession code GEO Database: GSE129846 [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE129846].
Supplemental Information
Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2020.06.011.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PMID 30797773 — Convergent Identification and Interrogation of Tumor-Intrinsic Factors that Modulate Cancer Immunity In Vivo.
Cell systems (2019) · https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30797773/

Convergent identification and interrogation of tumor-intrinsic factors that modulate cancer immunity in vivo
Summary
The genetic makeup of cancer cells directs oncogenesis and influences the tumor microenvironment. In this study, we massively profiled genes that functionally drive tumorigenesis using genome-scale in vivo CRISPR screens in hosts with different levels of immunocompetence. As a convergent hit from these screens, Prkar1a mutant cells are able to robustly outgrow as tumors in fully immunocompetent hosts. Functional interrogation showed that Prkar1a loss greatly altered the transcriptome and proteome involved in inflammatory and immune responses as well as extracellular protein production. Single cell transcriptomic profiling and flow cytometry analysis mapped the tumor microenvironment of Prkar1a mutant tumors, and revealed the transcriptomic alterations in host myeloid cells. Taken together, our data suggest that tumor-intrinsic mutations in Prkar1a lead to drastic alterations in the genetic program of cancer cells, thereby remodeling the tumor microenvironment.
eTOC
Codina et al. performed genome-scale in vivo CRISPR screens robustly identified multiple regulators of tumor-intrinsic factors that alter the ability of cells to grow as tumors across different levels of immunocompetence. Characterization of Prkar1a, a convergent hit from these screens, showed that its knockdown leads to drastic alterations in the phosphoproteome and transcriptome, corresponding to changes in the tumor microenvironment.
Graphical Abstract
Introduction
As a key hallmark of cancer, cancer cells have the ability to escape immune surveillance using mechanisms such as immuno-editing. Immune escape leads to resistance to various forms of cancer immunotherapy, especially checkpoint blockade immunotherapy (CBI), by primary, adaptive, or acquired resistance. A greater understanding of this process is therefore of central importance for improving clinical outcomes. Complex genetic, cellular and immunological factors influence oncogenesis under a fully functional immune system. The interactions between the immune system and cancer cells in are continuous, dynamic, and evolving. These interactions span from the initial establishment of a cancer cell to the development of metastatic disease, which is dependent on immune evasion, alteration of molecular features, cellular composition, and the tumor-immune microenvironment. Our understanding of this phenomenon has just begun to be elucidated by pioneering studies, which have shown both tumor extrinsic and tumor intrinsic mechanisms. Tumor extrinsic mechanisms include non-tumor components within the tumor microenvironment, including regulatory T cells (Tregs), myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), M2 macrophages, and other inhibitory immune checkpoints. All of these are able to contribute to the inhibition of anti-tumor immune responses, and are thus also of fundamental importance to CBI efficacy.
Tumor intrinsic mechanisms of immune evasion include a lack of antigenic proteins, low mutational burden, impaired antigen presentation by silencing or deletion of key molecules such as TAP, B2M, and HLA. Additionally, constitutive expression of immunosuppressive ligands like PD-L1, either via transcriptional activation, epigenetic regulation or truncation of the 3’UTR has been shown to be immune-suppressive. Immune evasion can also arise from oncogenic pathways that directly influence the malignant nature of cancer cells, resulting in the alteration of the tumor-immune microenvironment. Examples include oncogenic signaling through the MAPK pathway resulting in the inhibition of T cell recruitment and function; loss of PTEN that enhances PI3K or ATK signaling; EGFR mutations that activate PD-1 pathway; overexpression of MYC that enforces the expression of CD47 or PD-L1; expression of CDK5 to dampen the ability of T cells to reject tumors; stabilization of P-catenin resulting in constitutive WNT signaling that induces T cell exclusion; modulation of interferon gamma (IFNg) receptor signaling molecule Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)); direct changes in expression of INFg receptor 1 and 2 (IFNGR1 and IFNGR2) and interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1); as well as epigenetic modifications of immune genes.
Several screening systems in human cells and mouse models have previously demonstrated success in identifying essential genes in cancer immunotherapy. We reasoned that performing in vivo tumorigenesis screens in hosts with different levels of immunocompetence would provide an approach to discover genetic factors in cancer cells that mediates tumor progression and immune response. Rag1−/− mice lack mature T and B cells due to the deficiency of Rag1. Nu/Nu are Foxn3 deficient and are athymic. C57BL/6 mice are commonly used wildtype mice fully immunocompetent. These mice represents with different levels of immunocompetence. In this study, through robust genetic screening, we have convergently identified Prkar1a as a potent suppressor of oncogenesis in multiple tiers of immunocompetence. We functionally interrogated its role in regulating gene expression and cellular properties for modulating the immune response and remodeling the tumor microenvironment.
Results
Convergent in vivo genome-scale knockout screens identify Prkar1a as a suppressor of oncogenesis across multiple hosts with different immune competence
We used a genome-scale in vivo CRISPR screening approach to identify oncogenic drivers in multiple hosts with different levels of immune competence. Specifically, we utilized a p53−/−;Myc-primed mouse hepatocyte cell line (denoted IM, or IMC9 after transduction with Cas9-GFP), which is immortalized but not transformed. We screened this line in multiple genotypes, including Rag1−/− mice, Nu/Nu mice, and fully immunocompetent C57BL/6 mice as a syngeneic host (Figure 1A). The hepatocytes were capable of forming tumors in Rag1−/− mice (10/10, 100%), but not Nu/Nu mice up to an injection dose of 10 million cells (0/10, 0%), suggesting that the immune system in Nu/Nu mice can keep tumor growth in check. In sharp contrast, when we mutagenized the cells with a genome-scale CRISPR knockout library (mBrie) (Methods), all (21/21) injections led to rapid tumor formation (Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test, p = 7e-4) (Figure 1A–B; Figure S1A; Supplemental Table Sets TS1). Neither the parental line (0/4) nor the mBrie library mutagenized pool (0/20) was able to generate tumor in C57BL/6 mice observed for at least 90 days. These data together suggested that the loss-of-function mutations in a subset of genes enabled the cells to robustly grow tumors within the Nu/Nu host.
To determine which mutants comprised the tumors that grew in Nu/Nu mice, we deep-sequenced the sgRNA library representations within the tumors, plasmid, and transduced cells prior to transplantation (Methods). Library representation analyses revealed high coverage in three infection control replicates (97.8% on average), and recurrent patterns of sgRNA representation in tumors (Correlation test among tumors, p < 2.2e-16) (Dataset S1; Figure S1B-C). Analyses of gene-targeting and non-targeting sgRNA distributions revealed a high consistency between replicates and the overall shifts between different sample types (Figure S1D–E), providing a high-quality genome-scale in vivo screen dataset for analysis of enriched sgRNAs in the outgrown tumors. When comparing the mean library representation of in vivo tumor cells to that in pre-injection cells, we detected a population of sgRNAs that were highly enriched in the tumors, many of which targeted the same gene with independent sgRNAs, whereas non-targeting control sgRNAs (NTCs) rarely conferred tumor outgrowth (Figure 1C; Figure S2A–B). By ranking the genes by the number of independent sgRNAs across all 21 tumors, we found that 2,335 genes have at least one significant sgRNAs passing a false-discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 0.2% (Figure 1D). Out of those, 120 genes had more than two significant sgRNAs, and twelve genes had all four of their targeting sgRNAs significantly enriched, serving as independent evidence of the knockout effect (Figure 1D). We then analyzed sgRNA enrichment using criteria for sgRNA abundance and significant incidence rate across independent tumors (Figure 1E) and independent sgRNAs. This approach identified genetic mutants that represent strength of selection, prevalence of phenotype, and robustness of constructs, respectively. Our analyses revealed a three-way convergence of robust hits, identifying 11 genes that were significantly enriched over all statistical criteria, including Apc, Csnk1a1, Nf2, Prkar1a, Pten, Rbsn, Serpinb7, Tsc1, Tsc2, Vps45, and Zbtb40 (Figure 1E). Additional analyses using RIGER (Methods), an established CRISPR screen analytical pipeline that utilizes the 2nd-best performing sgRNAs, revealed a highly similar set of genes, with 16 genes at the maximum level of statistical significance (Supplemental Table Sets TS2–TS3; Figure 1F; Figure 2A). Further analysis using MAGeCK, a model-based approach with consideration of the empirical null distribution of NTCs (Methods), also identified a similar set of genes, with nine genes having top level statistical significance of positive selection signature (Supplemental Table Sets TS4–TS5; Figure 1G; Figure 2A). Therefore, this screen identified high-confidence, candidate genes that were strongly enriched in tumors that escaped the immune system of the Nu/Nu host.
To further enhance the rigor and stringency of identification, we repeated the screen with an independent CRISPR knockout library (mGeCKO) using the same optimized screening strategy (Dataset S2). This screen identified five top genes that passed the stringent statistical criteria using our custom 3-way hitcaller pipeline (FDR < 0.2%, >=2 sgRNAs, >=2% read abundance and >=25% of all tumors), of which three (Apc, Prkar1a, and Tsc2) overlap with the most stringent hits from the mBrie screen (Figure 2A). Similarly, four genes were identified as overlapping, stringent hits from both screens using RIGER and MAGeCK (Figure 2A). Multiple independent sgRNAs targeting these genes were consistently found at high levels across tumor samples relative to the infection-control cell samples, upon verification of single genes (Figure S2C–F). Apc, Prkar1a, and Tsc2 are the three genes that robustly emerged independent of statistical criteria, computational algorithm and screening library (Figure 2A; Figure S2C–F).
To validate Prkar1a and other top candidates, we performed tumor challenges that used single sgRNAs to target these genes in immortalized hepatocyte cells, followed by transplantation into Nu/Nu mice or fully immunocompetent C57BL/6 mice. Compared to NTC controls, all four top mutants identified from the screens were validated as potent tumor generators when transplanted into Nu/Nu mice (Figure 2B–D; Figure S3A–E). In sharp contrast, only the Prkar1a mutant is capable of generating tumors in immunocompetent C57BL/6 mice (Figure 2B–D), whereas mice challenged by cells with strong drivers mutated, including Apc, Tsc2 and Csnk1a1, remained tumor-free for the whole duration of experiment (60 days) (Figure 2B–D). These data indicated that Prkar1a knockout endowed the immortalized hepatocytes with the ability to develop tumors in fully immunocompetent hosts.
Phosphoproteomic characterization of Prkar1a mutants identified its downstream signaling targets
Due to the strong phenotype of Prkar1a knockout, we set out to interrogate the molecular regulation of Prkar1a and its downstream pathways. Prkar1a encodes the alpha regulatory subunit of the cAMP-Dependent Type I protein kinase (Protein kinase A, PKA). Due to the potential direct regulatory roles of Prkar1a in phosphorylation signaling, we investigated the changes in kinase activity and the phosphoproteome upon Prkar1a loss via stable isotope labeling using amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) (Figure 3A). Due to the amount of materials needed for SILAC experiments, we performed the proteomics experiments in culture outside a host context, with the goal to map out the cancer cells’ intrinsic properties.
We labeled the Prkar1a mutant cells (sgPrkar1a ) with Lys6/Arg6 “heavy” stable isotope and control cells (NTC) with Lys0/Arg0 “light” stable isotope, and proteins were extracted, mixed, trypsin-digested, TiO2-enriched for phosphopeptides, fractionated by cation exchange chromatography (CEX) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a LTQ Orbitrap XL (Methods). Two independent SILAC-pair replicates were used to compare Prkar1a mutants to control cells at the peptide, protein, and post-translational modification levels, at which we identified a respective 19,979 unique peptides (peptide spectrum matches, PSMs), 2,940 protein groups and 2,994 phosphorylation sites after strict quality control filtering (Datasets S3–S5). From this dataset, we identified differentially regulated proteins, as well as a set of differentially phosphorylated peptides upon Prkar1a loss, based on phosphorylation fold change at a peptide phosphorylation site (PS) and by the number of differentially phosphorylated peptides in a protein group (Figure 3B, C, E). As a robustness check, PRKAR1A protein level was confirmed to be one of the most downregulated proteins in the sgPrkar1a group (Figure 3B), validating the proteomics measurements. Additional validation of the data was assessed by the Western blot quantification of STAT3, one of the most upregulated proteins in the dataset and a key player in immune and inflammation signaling (Figure 3B, D). The proteins with the most significant hyper-phosphorylation upon Prkar1a loss included IWS1, LIMCH1 and GOLGB1 (Figure 3E). The phospho-signaling pathway changes in Prkar1a mutants, based on differentially phosphorylated proteins, showed that the most significantly enriched pathway change in Prkar1a mutants was integrin-linked kinase (ILK) signaling, Rho GTPase signaling, PKA signaling, mTOR signaling, JAK/STAT signaling and others, all of which modulate oncogenesis and ECM remodeling (Figure 3F). Comparative analysis of all PSs as a set showed a shift in the kinase activity of Prkar1a mutants, emphasized by alterations in the target motifs of differentially phosphorylated peptides, for which the hypo-phosphorylated peptides are enriched in the S*P motif, whereas the hyper-phosphorylated peptides are enriched in RRxS* and RxxS* motifs (Figure 3G). These data together revealed the proteome and phospho-proteome level alterations in Prkar1a mutant cells.
Whole transcriptome profiling identified deregulated gene expression programs in Prkar1a mutants
To further dissect the gene product changes downstream of phosphorylation, we utilized mRNA-sequencing (mRNA-seq) to profile the transcriptome of Prkar1a mutant cells together with matched NTC controls in culture, using three independent sgRNAs for sgPrkar1a and two independent NTCs, with three biological replicates for each sample group (Methods). We collected total RNA from IMC9 cells at 7 days-post-infection in biological triplicates and performed strand-specific, poly-A enriched mRNA-seq (Datasets S6). Using a differential expression analysis, we identified a set of 371 transcripts that are differentially expressed between Prkar1a mutant and wildtype cells, with 119 transcripts being down-regulated and 252 being up-regulated upon Prkar1a loss (Dataset S7, Figure 4A–B). These differentially expressed genes belonged to a distinct set of pathways with the most significantly upregulated genes centered on immune, inflammatory and secreted protein signatures (Figure 4B). Gene ontology analysis by the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) revealed that extracellular proteins were among the top categories of Prkar1a-upregulated genes, along with the anticipated on-target cAMP catabolic process signature mediated by the feedback regulation of PKA signaling via the Phosphodiesterases (Pde) gene family (Supplemental Table Sets TS6–TS7; Figure S4A). The immune, inflammatory and cAMP-catabolism signatures were recapitulated with gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) (Supplemental Table Sets TS8–TS9; Figure 4D–E). A closer look of specific transcripts revealed that Prkar1a significantly upregulated genes encode inflammatory and secretory factors, such as cell surface proteins, cytokines, ECM proteins and molecular mediators of immune response (Figure 4F–G; Figure S4B). Using ELISA, we further confirmed that Prkar1a mutant cells turned on the protein production switch of IL-6, a pro-inflammatory cytokine with important roles in promoting tumor progression (Prkar1a vs NTC, > 800-fold change; p < 0.0001; Figure 4H). Moreover, STAT3 the transcription factor associated with IL-6 expression, was also found to be upregulated at the mRNA level, showing consistency between our proteomic and transcriptomic data sets (p = 6.1e-25). Echoing the phenotypes, these data suggest that cancer cell intrinsic Prkar1a-loss leads to upregulated production of secreted cytokines and extracellular proteins implicated in inflammatory response, which may influence the host tumor microenvironment (TME).
Single-cell transcriptome profiling mapped the tumor microenvironment of Prkar1a mutant tumors in hosts of varying immunocompetence
To directly interrogate the host TME, we performed single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) (Methods), an approach that can elucidate both the gene expression signature and cell population structure in a high-throughput manner. We re-challenged Rag1−/−, Nu/Nu and C57BL/6 mice with Prkar1a and NTC cells (Figure 5A). As expected, Prkar1a cells grew tumors in all three mice genotypes, whereas NTC cells only grew in Rag1−/− (Figure 5A–B). We then sought to profile the tumor-infiltrating immune repertoire, and simultaneously profile the cancer cells in the same tumor. However, since the vast majority of cells in the tumor single cell suspensions are cancer cells, we performed FACS to purify both CD45+ immune cells and GFP+ cancer cells. Using these enriched immune cell populations, we subsequently spiked-in a smaller fraction of cancer cells taken from the same tumor. The single cells were barcoded and had cDNA libraries constructed in a single-cell manner, based on previously established methods (Methods) (Figure 5A) (Datasets S8–S14; Supplemental Table Sets TS10–TS14). The single-cell transcriptional data were dimensionality-reduced by principle components analysis (PCA), visualized by t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) and clustered by shared nearest neighbor (SNN) methods. The single-cell clustering identified distinct different subpopulations of the sequenced TME cellular repertoire for the Prkar1a and NTC tumors in Rag1−/− mice as well as the Prkar1a tumors in Nu/Nu and C57BL/6 mice (Figure 5C).
By merging the transcriptome data from the single cell populations of sgPrkar1a and sgNTC-generated tumors in Rag1−/− mice, we identified 3 clusters (Figure 6A), based on the optimal cell separation in the t-SNE embedding, canonical immune gene expression patterns, and optimal rank selection using non-negative matrix factorization (NMF). We distinguished cluster 1 and 2 as immune cells, largely comprised of myeloid populations, based on the significantly up-regulated expression of Cd14, Fcgr3 (Cd16) and Fcgr2b (Cd32), as well as increased expression of Itgam (Cd11b) (MAST analysis; adjusted p < 1e-9) (Figure 6C; Figure S6), whereas cluster 3 cells are primarily cancer cells, based on expression of tumor-specific marker genes, Mgp, Fkbp11, Cdkn2a and Mrpl33, identified by comparing the most highly expressed genes in the IMC9 cells from bulk RNA-seq analysis to a reference panel of immune cells comprised of Immunological Genome Project data (ImmGen version 1) (Figure 6C; Figure S5B; Figure S6). In addition, we classified the clusters into stromal and innate immune cell types by comparing the mean expression of cluster-specific differentially expressed genes (MAST analysis of each cluster relative to all other cells; adjusted p < 1e-3, 95th-percentile of |log-scale fold-change expression|) to an ImmGen reference panel, comprised of 85 cell types (Figure 6B; Figure S5D). This transcriptional comparison shows moderate correlation (Kendall correlation co-efficient τ > 0.3) between clusters 1–2 and myeloid cell types, including macrophage, dendritic cell (DC) and monocyte cells, with cluster 1 also correlating with granulocytic neutrophils (Figure 6B). In contrast, the cluster 3 population moderately correlated (τ > 0.3) with fibroblast cells and weakly (τ > 0.2) with endothelial and epithelial cells (Figure 6B).
Further categorization suggested that cluster 1 is best described as a population of tumor associated macrophages (TAMs), with significantly increased expression (adjusted p < 1e-8) of key TAM markers, including Cd68, Cd163 and Csf1r (Cd115). In addition, our data suggest that both immune cell clusters contain myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) with notable expression of multiple MDSC markers, including significantly increased expression of Arg1, Cybb (Nox2) and Il4ra markers, relative to tumor cells of cluster 3 (Figure 6C, Figure S6). Once the clusters were characterized, we assessed the transcriptional differences related to Prkar1a loss, as it affects each cell cluster. These differential expression analyses show that Prkar1a loss is significantly associated with the increased expression of the inflammatory marker Saa3 in all three clusters (adjusted p < 1e-5), indicating that the inflammatory phenotype observed by RNA-seq is conferred to the TME. Decreased expression of MHCII genes in both immune cell clusters was also observed, including Cd74, H2-Aa, H2-Ab1 and H2-Eb1 (adjusted p < 1e-9; Figure 6D). In addition, the chemokine gene Cxcl13 is significantly increased in the cluster 1 cells (adjusted p < 4.23e-22; Figure 6D). Together, these data mapped the TME of Prkar1a mutant tumors in Rag1−/− mice and revealed the cellular repertoire as well as transcriptional changes in immune genes.
Next, we investigated whether the same immune infiltrates are found within immuno-competent C57BL/6 tumors, generated by the loss of Prkar1a. Wildtype tumors were not assessed in the immuno-competent background, as NTC tumors did not form in C57BL/6, therefore, only Prkar1a mutant tumors can be profiled in this host to serve as a refinement but not comparison. We repeated the single cell transcriptomics analysis of eGFP+ IMC9 and CD45+ immune cells of C57BL/6 tumors as a 1:10 mixed cell ratio, with the 10X Genomics platform for scRNA-seq library prep prior to sequencing. After pre-processing, we applied the Potential of Heat-diffusion for Affinity-based Trajectory Embedding (PHATE) technique (Figure S5C Left). The ensuing population structure of the data showed a notable split into two discreet groups of cells, which represented immune and tumor subsets, based on the expression of Ptprc (Cd45) and Mgp genes, respectively (Figure S5C Right). As the expression of these genes was not detected in all cells, we partitioned the population structure into two clusters using unsupervised SNN clustering. Next, we investigated the immune cell populations in finer detail by subsetting the Ptprc+ cluster and visualizing the subpopulation structure by PHATE dimensionality reduction, followed by unsupervised clustering (Figure S5D). We next sought to categorize the five immune subpopulations by comparing the expression of cluster-specific genes (Methods) in each cluster to 107 known immune cells of a reference panel, comprised of neutrophils, macrophages, monocytes, dendritic cells (DCs), natural killer cells and T cells (Figure S5E). The correlation heatmap shows a macrophage signature in all immune subclusters, with the strongest macrophage-correlations to subclusters 1, 2 and 4 (τ > 0.5). These three clusters also have moderately high correlations to DCs and monocytes (τ > 0.4), whereas subcluster 3 correlates moderately high with neutrophil and macrophage cell types (τ > 0.4). In support of this cell type categorization, we show significantly increased expression of TAM-specific genes Adgre1 (F4/80), Csf1r (Cd115) and H2-Aa (MHC-II) in subcluster 4 (adjusted p < 1e-5; Figure S7). We also found significantly increased expression of various myeloid markers in the adjacent subclusters of 1 and 3, which might represent populations of MDSCs. We also show significantly upregulated expression of MDSC regulatory genes (Ddit3 and Sl00a8) and M-MDSC enzymes (Arg1 and Nos2) in subcluster 3 cells (Figure S7). Furthermore, the data shows increased trends in PMN-MDSC-related genes, Cybb (Nox2) and Cd244 (Figure S7). We see the expression of these immune cell type genes follow gradient-like expression patterns across cells in the PHATE plot (Figure S7 Bottom). As the PHATE dimensionality reduction technique has been shown to preserve both local and global relationships between cells, these gradient-like transcriptional trends may reflect a spectrum of the phenotype in these different myeloid cell types, which will be interesting to explore in future single-cell analyses. These data further corroborated the refined TME of Prkar1a mutant tumors in the fully immunocompetent C57BL/6 wildtype host.
Flow cytometry confirms the alterations of tumor microenvironment in Prkar1a mutant tumors
To directly quantify Prkar1a knockout mediated differences in tumor-infiltrating immune cell populations, we performed flow cytometry on eight tumors with Prkar1a loss and six tumors without. First, we quantified dendritic cells and TAMs (Figure 7A, C), however there are no significant changes between Prkar1a knockout and wildtype tumors, yet there was a noteworthy decrease in TAMs in Prkar1a knockout tumors (Figure 7A, C). Subsequently, we inspected MDSC populations to show a significant increase of PMN-MDSCs and significant decrease of M-MDSCs in Prkar1a knockout tumors (adjusted p = 4.99e-7 and 1.88e-6, respectively; Figure 7B–C). Taken together, these data show that the loss of Prkar1a leads to a polarized recruitment of PMN-MDSCs, as well as a decrease in TAMs and the M-MDSCs from which they are derived, representing a substantial alteration of the host TME.
Discussion
Malignant transformation, oncogenesis, and evading immune destruction are all key hallmarks of cancer with fundamental roles in the cancer immune cycle with direct consequences on immunotherapy outcomes. Using multiple whole-genome knockout screens, we identified several candidate factors whose loss-of-function consistently led to tumor outgrowth in mouse hosts with different levels of immunocompetence. Knocking out several hits enabled the cells to grow out in Nu/Nu mice as tumors, while only Prkar1a knockout cells are able to grow in fully immunocompetent C57BL/6 mice. This is surprising given that under the same genetic context, knockouts of well-known tumor suppressors such as Tsc2 and Apc failed to grow in the C57BL/6 host. Prkar1a encodes a regulatory subunit of the PKA holoenzyme complex. Prkar1a is the only subunit of the four whose knockout leads to pronounced disease-related phenotypes. Prkar1a mutations were associated with disease in the Carney complex (CNC), a disease syndrome characterized by hyper-pigmented skin and sporadic neoplasias. In this context, hereditary or germline LOF mutations in Prkar1a were sufficient to produce the disease in a dominant manner. In addition, Prkar1a mutations are associated with several tumor types such as cardiac, endocrine, thyroid and lung adenocarcinoma. Prkar1a overexpression is also associated with tumor formation in multiple contexts, indicating that altering Prkar1a function leads to differential phenotypes across cellular and genetic backgrounds. Additionally, recent clinical findings show that patients with a rare form of liver cancer, known as fibrolamellar HCC, harbor the classical DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion, which was recapitulated in mouse model of cancer. This fusion protein results in hyperactive PKA signaling, similar to Prkar1a knockouts. Supporting the similarity, a subset of CNC patients also develop fibrolamellar HCC indicating significant overlap between the phenotypes. Given the increased likelihood with which patients with CNC develop various types of tumors, Prkar1a was speculated to be a suppressor for early oncogenesis, where the immune system plays a fundamental role in clearing mutated cells with aberrant growth to preserves tissue homeostasis.
While its role as a tumor suppressor is now supported, the molecular changes associated with Prkar1a−/− mediated tumorigenesis are less clear. Reports have shown that Prkar1a knockout increases PKA activity, as well as resistance to apoptosis via mTOR activation (Robinson-White et al., 2006; Pringle et al, 2014). Additionally, it has also been shown that Prkar1a regulates the ERK/Snail/E-cadherin pathway. We investigated the mechanistic mechanisms of Prkar1a in cancer cells, showing that its genetic perturbation leads to drastic alterations in the proteome, phosphoproteome and the transcriptome. These changes center on acute inflammatory responses, mediators of immune response, and production of secreted ECM proteins and cytokines. For example, IL-6 production is dramatically upregulated, potentially enhancing Prkar1a−/− cells’ ability to drive inflammation in the absence of other cell types, as well as to drive early malignant transformation in both an autocrine and paracrine manner. Notably, a miRNA overexpressed in various cancers, miRNA-1246, targets PKA pathway genes leading to an inflammatory phenotype (Bott et al., 2017), which further supports our findings.
Single-cell transcriptome profiling and comparative analysis of Prkar1a mutant and wildtype tumor cells in Rag1−/− mice revealed the TME alterations in this host. The phenotypic effect of Prkar1a knockout is too strong to have comparable tumors in the hosts with more potent immune systems (Nu/Nu and C57BL/6, where Prkar1a wildtype cells cannot grow as tumors). The down-regulation of MHC-II in the immune cells of Prkar1a tumors on Rag1−/− mice may suggest gene expression changes in the tumor-associated macrophage populations or recruitment of myeloid-derived suppressive cells. Alternatively, the down-regulation of antigen presentation in resident macrophages is in line with the reduced MHCII expression. Furthermore, characterization of the immune cell infiltrate by flow cytometry in Rag1−/− mice showed a significant increase of PMN-MDSCs relative to controls. PMN-MDSCs are antigen specific immunosuppressive cells, known to down-regulate cytotoxic T-cell activity resulting in tumor specific T-cell tolerance. While additional studies will need to be performed to understand the significance of this finding, it raises the possibility that the PMN-MDSCs could play an outsized role in regulating the growth of Prkar1a−/− tumors in hosts with intact adaptive immune system. Future molecular characterization of Prkar1a may further unveil the detailed molecular, cellular and immunological mechanisms underlying TME changes driven by this gene or other tumor-intrinsic factors. In summary, by convergent genome-scale screens and multiple sets of functional interrogation, we have identified Prkar1a as a gene regulating a tumor-intrinsic genetic program for remodeling the tumor microenvironment.
STAR Methods
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
All resources related to this work are available upon reasonable request to the lead contact, Sidi Chen (sidi.chen@yale.edu).
METHOD DETAILS
Cell culture
Immortalized hepatocyte cell lines with the background of p53−/−;cMyc (IM and 172) were from. Lung cancer cells were from. Cells were transduced with lenti-Cas9 or lenti-Cas9-GFP to generate Cas9-positive cells. All cell lines were grown under standard conditions using DMEM containing 5% FBS & 1% Penstrep in a CO2 incubator unless otherwise noted. Cell culture for SILAC experiment was described below.
Mice
Several mouse strains with various levels of immunocompetence were used as transplant hosts, including C57BL/6, Nu/Nu and Rag1−/−. Mice, both sexes, between the ages of 6–12 weeks of age were used for the study. All animals were housed in standard individually ventilated, pathogen-free conditions, with 12h:12h or 13h:11h light cycle, room temperature (21–23°C) and 40–60% relative humidity. When a cohort of animals was receiving multiple treatments, animals were randomized by 1) randomly assign animals to different groups using littermates, 2) random mixing of females prior to treatment, maximizing the evenness or representation of mice from different cages in each group, and/or 3) random assignment of mice to each group, in order to minimize the effect of gender, litter, small difference in age, cage, housing position, where applicable. All mouse experiments follow ARRIVE guidelines.
Virus production of CRISPR library
First-generation and second-generation mouse genome-scale CRISPR sgRNA libraries, mGeCKO and mBrie, respectively, from and. Libraries were amplified and re-sequenced by barcoded Illumina sequencing with customized primers to ensure proper representation. For virus production, envelope plasmid pMD2.G, packaging plasmid psPAX2, and library plasmid were added at ratios of 1: 1:2.5, and then polyethyleneimine (PEI) was added and mixed well by vortexing. The solution was stand at room temperature for 10–20 min, and then the mixture was dropwisely added into 80–90% confluent HEK293FT cells and mixed well by gently agitating the plates. Six hours post-transfection, fresh DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% Pen/Strep was added to replace the transfection media. Virus-containing supernatant was collected at 48 h and 72 h post-transfection, and was centrifuged at 1500 g for 10 min to remove the cell debris; aliquoted and stored at −80°C. Virus was titrated by infecting IM cells at a number of different concentrations, followed by the addition of 2 μg/mL puromycin at 24 h postinfection to select the transduced cells. The virus titers were determined by calculating the ratios of surviving cells 48 or 72 h post infection and the cell count at infection.
Cellular CRISPR library production
Cells were transduced at 500x or higher coverage and at MOI between 0.2 to 0.4 to ensure sufficient coverage of the library and low percentage of multiple infectants, using a method similar to.
Cell library transplantation
Un-transduced and library-transduced cells were injected subcutaneously into the right and left flanks of Nu/Nu mice at 2e7 cells per flank. The mGeCKO- or mBrie- transduced IMC9 cells were treated in a similar manner, with the exception that 2.5e7 cells were injected into the right flank only. Tumors were measured every 2–3 days by caliper and their sizes were estimated as spheres. Statistical significance was assessed by Welch’s t-test, given the unequal sample numbers and variances for each treatment condition.
Mouse organ dissection, imaging, and histology
Mice were sacrificed by carbon dioxide asphyxiation or deep anesthesia with isoflurane followed by cervical dislocation. Mouse livers and other organs were manually dissected and examined under a fluorescent stereoscope (Zeiss). Organs were then fixed in 4% formaldehyde or 10% formalin for 48 to 96 hours, embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 6 μm and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) for pathology. For tumor size quantification, H&E slides were scanned using an Aperio digital slidescanner (Leica). Tumor sizes in area were measured using ImageScope (Leica). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was done with well-established markers using standard protocols (see key resources table for reagent information). IHC staining quantification was done manually using ImageScope (Leica), where applicable.
Mouse tissue collection for molecular biology
Mouse organs were dissected and collected manually under a dissection scope where applicable. For molecular biology, tissues were flash frozen with liquid nitrogen, ground in 24 Well Polyethylene Vials with metal beads in a GenoGrinder machine (OPS diagnostics). Homogenized tissues were used for DNA/RNA/protein extractions using standard molecular biology protocols.
Genomic DNA extraction
A total of 3e7 cells per replicate, or 200–800 mg of frozen ground tissue each sample, was used for gDNA extraction for library readout. Samples were re-suspended in 6 mL of NK Lysis Buffer (50 mM Tris, 50 mM EDTA, 1% SDS, pH 8.0) supplemented with 30 μL of 20 mg/mL Proteinase K (Qiagen) in 15 mL conical tubes, and incubated at 55 °C bath for 2 h up to overnight. After all the tissues have been lysed, 30 μL of 10 mg/mL RNAse A (Qiagen) was added, mixed well and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. Samples were chilled on ice and then 2 mL of pre-chilled 7.5 M ammonium acetate (Sigma) was added to precipitate proteins. The samples were inverted and vortexed for 15–30 s and then centrifuged at ≥ 4,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was carefully decanted into a new 15 mL conical tube, followed by the addition of 6 mL 100% isopropanol (at a ratio of ~ 0.7), inverted 30–50 times and centrifuged at ≥ 4,000 g for 10 minutes. Genomic DNA should be visible as a small white pellet. After discarding the supernatant, 6 mL of freshly prepared 70% ethanol was added, mixed well, and then centrifuged at ≥ 4,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was discarded by pouring; and remaining residues was removed using a pipette. After air-drying for 10–30 min, DNA was re-suspended by adding 200–500 μL of Nuclease-Free H2O. The genomic DNA concentration was measured using a Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific), and normalized to 1000 ng/μL for the following readout PCR.
Demultiplexing and read preprocessing
Raw single-end fastq read files were filtered and demultiplexed using Cutadapt. To remove extra sequences downstream (i.e. 3’ end) of the sgRNA spacer sequences, we used the following settings: cutadapt --discard-untrimmed -a GTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATGGC. As the forward PCR primers used to readout sgRNA representation were designed to have a variety of barcodes to facilitate multiplexed sequencing, we then demultiplexed these filtered reads with the following settings: cutadapt -g file:fbc.fasta --no-trim, where fbc.fasta contained the 12 possible barcode sequences within the forward primers. Finally, to remove extra sequences upstream (i.e. 5’ end) of the sgRNA spacers, we used the following settings: cutadapt --discard-untrimmed -g GTGGAAAGGACGAAACACCG. Through this procedure, the raw fastq read files could be pared down to the 20bp sgRNA spacer sequences.
Mapping of sgRNA spacers and quantitation of sgRNAs
Having extracted the 20 bp sgRNA spacer sequences from each demulitplexed sample, we then mapped the sgRNA spacers to the library from which they originated (either mGeCKO or mBrie). To do so, we first generated a bowtie index of either sgRNA library using the bowtie-build command in Bowtie 1.1.2. Using these bowtie indexes, we mapped the filtered fastq read files using the following settings: bowtie -v 1 --suppress 4,5,6,7 --chunkmbs 2000 --best. Using the resultant mapping output, we quantitated the number of reads that had mapped to each sgRNA within the library. To generate sgRNA representation barplots, we set a detection threshold of 1 read, and counted the number of unique sgRNAs present in each sample.
Normalization and summary-level analysis of sgRNA abundances
We normalized the number of reads in each sample by converting raw sgRNA counts to reads per million (rpm). The rpm values were then subject to log2 transformation for certain analyses. To generate correlation heatmaps, we used the NMF R package and calculated the Pearson correlations between individual samples using log2 rpm counts. To calculate the cumulative distribution function for each sample group, we first averaged the normalized sgRNA counts across all samples within a given group. We then used the ecdfplot function in the latticeExtra R package to generate empirical cumulative distribution plots.
Determining significantly enriched sgRNAs (custom 3-Way HitCaller)
Three criteria were used to identify enriched sgRNAs / genes: 1) if an sgRNA comprised ≥ 2% of the total reads in at least one tumor sample; 2) if an sgRNA was deemed statistically significantly enriched in ≥ 25% of all tumor samples (for mBrie) or ≥ 50% of all tumor samples (for mGeCKO) using a false-discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 2% based on the abundances of all nontargeting controls; or 3) if ≥ 2 independent sgRNAs targeting the same gene were each found to be statistically significant at FDR < 2% in at least one tumor sample. For the first and second criteria, individual sgRNA hits were collapsed to genes to facilitate comparisons with the hits from the third criteria.
Individual gene validation in Nu/Nu and C57BL/6J mice
Two to three sgRNAs were chosen for each validation target, corresponding to the most highly enriched sgRNAs found within tumors. Additionally, 3 NTCs sgRNAs were chosen randomly from the mGeCKO library to serve as negative controls. All sgRNA spacers were cloned in to lentiviral backbone, and virus was produced in HEK293FT cells as described above at a lower scale. IM.C9 cells were infected with validation constructs and selected for via 5 μg/mL puromycin treatment to produce KO cell lines. For each cell line 4e5 cells were injected into both flanks of a Nu/Nu or C57BL/6 mouse 5–7 days post viral infection. Tumors were measured by caliper every 2–3 days to assess growth rate.
SILAC proteomics sample preparation
Both sgPrkar1a and NTC transduced IMC9 cells were grown in standard tissue culture conditions as described previously, with the exception of the media used. sgPrkar1a cells were cultured with media containing lys6 and arg6 isotopes, deficient in the regular forms of the amino acids. NTC cells were grown in standard media. Cells were cultured for one week, and > 5 passages to promote full incorporation of the heavy isotopes. Cells were counted using a countess II machine and trypan blue staining. Protein was subsequently extracted with RIPA buffer on ice for 30 minutes, using 200 μ l lx buffer per million cells. Lysate was then spun down for 15 min at 14,000g. Protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) was then added to the extracted supernatant to prevent degradation. Protein concentration was measured and then normalized by Bradford assay with BSA standard. Following Bradford lysates from heavy sgPrkar1a cells and light NTC cells were mixed in a 1:1 ratio, followed by phosphopeptide enrichment. The flowthrough fractions contain unmodified peptides and the eluate fractions contain phosphopeptides, which were subjected to MassSpec analysis.
Proteomics analysis
Proteomic quantification and analysis of SILAC-labeled samples was performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1. Specifically, raw LC-MS/MS data files were analyzed using the default Orbitrap and MS/MS instrument parameters for Arg6/Lys6 “heavy” and Arg0/Lys0 “light” double SILAC-labeled peptides that had no more than three labeled residues. Peptide searches were then performed using a reference panel, derived from the in silico trypsin digest of the UniProt C57BL/6J mouse reference proteome (Proteome ID: UP000000589; last modified: May 16, 2017) with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites. These peptide searches included carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, as well as oxidation (M), acetyl (N-terminal), Gln/Glu -> pyro-Glu, phospho (STY) and deamination (NQ) as variable modifications. In addition, each peptide was searched for a maximum of 6 variable modifications, a maximum of 200 modification combinations, and the searches were set to include peptides with >= 7 residues, <= 4600 Da, and unspecific searches required a peptide length between 8 and 25 residues. Co-fragmented peptides from a MS/MS spectrum were identified and quantified. Missing patterns of incomplete isotope pattern SILAC labeled pairs were requantified, based on the identified isotope pattern. The “Match between runs’ algorithm was used to identify peptide features with a missing MS/MS spectrum or peptide sequence from another run, based on identified m/z and RT information. For the protein-level analysis, protein group identification required >=1 razor/unique peptide, and protein group quantification required at least 2 quantified peptide feature ratios between SILAC pairs. Protein ratio calculations included both razor and unique peptides, as well as unmodified peptides and peptides with oxidation (M) and acetyl (N-terminal) modifications; however, the unmodified counterparts/versions of these modified peptides were omitted from quantification. The protein group ratios were calculated using the “advanced ratio estimation” method, which reports the median of the peptide feature ratios or the result of a regression model for the intensities and log ratios if there is a correlation. Results from the peptide spectrum match (PSM), protein group and phospho-site analyses had reverse and contaminant sequences removed and were filtered based on a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) that was calculated using the target-decoy strategy, in which decoy sequences were derived from reverse protein sequences. The PSM were also filtered based on the best spectrum match of a PSM (Andromeda score > 40), the difference between the Andromeda score of the best hit with that of the second best sequence hit (delta-score > 8), and the posterior error probability (PEP) of a false match (PEP < 0.01). The phospho-site level data were filtered as the PSM with the addition of a localization probability threshold for post-translational modifications (probability > 0.75). Protein groups were also filtered based on FDR (q value < 0.01).
Phosphorylation site motif analysis
Hypo- and hyper-phosphorylation site (hypo-PS and hyper-PS, respectively) motifs were identified by a motif discovery analysis performed using the Modification Motifs (MoMo) tool from the MEME software suite version 4.12.0. The motif discovery analysis used default settings with the Motif-X algorithm and included PS sequences, adjusted to a 15 residue width with the PS of interest at the center, and the background sequence database was the UniProt mouse proteome, which was used as the initial proteomics reference panel. The identified PS motifs were then compared to kinase phosphorylation motifs using the Tomtom motif comparison tool from the MEME software suite. The motif comparison analysis was performed using the default settings and kinase phosphorylation motif data from the PhosphoNetworks database.
Western blot
NTC and sgPrkar1a cells were cultured in regular media as above for 48 hours. Total protein samples from were collected and protease inhibitor cocktail was added to prevent degradation. Protein concentration was measured and then normalized by Bradford assay with BSA standard. Western was performed using a standard molecular biology protocols with antibodies detailed in Key Resources Table.
RNA-seq differential expression analysis
Strand-specific single-end RNA-seq read files were analyzed to obtain transcript level counts using Kallisto, with the settings --rf-stranded -b 100. Differential expression analysis between sg-NTC and sg-Prkar1a treated cells were then performed using Sleuth, with default settings.
Pathway enrichment analysis
For GSEA we considered the entire set of genes in the differential expression analysis, and sorted the genes by their fold change values without regard to p-values. This ranked gene list was used for GSEA pre-ranked analysis, in reference to the C5-all pathway database. We considered a pathway as statistically significant if the q-value was less than 0.1. Using an adjusted p-value cutoff of 0.05, and a fold change threshold of ±1 (the “b” value from Sleuth output), we determined the set of transcripts that were significantly upregulated or downregulated with Prkar1a deletion. Converting these transcripts to the gene level, we then used the resultant gene sets for DAVID functional annotation analysis, where we only considered GO categories. We considered a GO category as statistically significant if the Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value was less than 0.05.
ELISA
NTC and sgPrkar1a cells were cultured in regular media as above for 48 hours. Supernatant protein samples from were collected and protease inhibitor cocktail was added to prevent degradation. IL-6 ELISA was performed using a commercial kit (RnD).
TIL isolation for scRNA-seq
Cells were cultured and prepared for subcutaneous injection as above. Five million cells were injected into each mouse, and tumors was harvested for scRNA-seq experiments. Tumor tissue was immediately placed in PBS containing 2% FBS to maintain cell viability. Tumor tissue was then manually cut into small pieces using a razor in a 10cm dish containing 5ml PBS containing 2% FBS. Tumor tissue was then suspended into 15–20ml PBS and loaded into gentleMACs tubes. Collagenase IV was added in a 1:100 dilution to each sample, prior to loading into the gentleMACs tissue dissociation machine. Tissue was then dissociated for 30’ at 37 C. After dissociation samples were passed through a 100uM filter and re-suspended into 40mL of PBS. Samples were then spun down at 400g for 5 min, and supernatant was discarded. Cell pellets then were washed with 40mL PBS, and spun down again at 400g for 5 min and supernatant was discarded. 3mL ACK lysis buffer was added to each cell pellet, gently pipetting to mix, then incubated for 3–5 min. After incubation samples were re-suspended in 40mL PBS and passed through a 40uM filter to remove debris. Cells were then washed again, and stained with anti-CD45.2 antibody for 30’ using a 1:100 dilution (1e6 cells per mL). Prior to FACS, cells were washed 2x in PBS. Cells were then sorted based on CD45.2 (pan-immune cells) and GFP (cancer cells), and mixed as 90%:10% for single cell transcriptomics analysis. Unique molecular identifier (UMI) and single cell barcoded library preparation and sequencing was done using a slightly modified approach based on previously established methods.
Pre-processing the single-cell RNA-seq data
Drop-seq (version 1.12) tools were used to preprocessing all Seq-Well single-cell RNA-seq data unless stated otherwise. First the paired-end read fastq files were merged and converted to Bam files by Picard-FastqToSam (Picard version 2.9.0). From the Bam files, cellular and unique molecular identifier barcodes were extracted, and reads were filtered to exclude those with single-base quality scores below 10. The sequences were then trimmed to remove adapters and polyA tails, and the files were converted back to fastq format by Picard-SamToFastq. The sequences were then mapped by STAR aligner (version 2.5.3a) to the mm10 mouse reference genome, provided by the McCarroll lab (GEO dataset: GSE63472). The aligned data were sorted by Picard-SortSam, and the cell and UMI barcode metadata were attached using Picard-MergeBamAlignment. Gencode annotations were added to the aligned reads, and digital gene expression (DGE) files were prepared for the 1000 most frequently occurring cell barcodes. For data generated by Chromium Single-cell 3’ RNA-sequencing (10X Genomics), preprocessing was performed using the Cellranger software count-pipeline (10X Genomics), aligning to the mm10 mouse genome reference with default settings. The pre-processed 10X and DGE matrices were then imported using the Seurat package for the R programming language (version 3.4.4), and the data were filtered to include genes detected in >5 cells, and cells with >200 detected genes and <5% mitochondrial genes. The data were then normalized to 10,000 transcripts/cell and log-transformed, using a pseudo-count of 1 (ln[x + 1]).
Filtering and visualization of scRNA-seq data
All single cell RNA-seq data analysis pipelines were performed using the Seurat package for R. For single-dataset analyses of NTC-Rag1−/−, sgPrkar1a-Rag1−/−, sgPrkar1a-Nu/Nu and sgPrkar1a-C57BL/6 tumor micro-environments, variable genes were identified using the FindVariableGenes Seurat function, in which genes are split into 20 equal-width bins by mean expression, then filtered for those with high dispersion (>0.5 standard deviations from the average dispersion (log variance/mean ratio) within a bin) and high/low mean expression (>8 or <0.0125). The variance in these variably expressed genes was then assessed by principal components analysis (PCA), and principal components were dimensionality reduced by t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) via the Barnes-Hut approximation implementation or PHATE. Next, cell clustering was performed using shared nearest neighbor (SNN) algorithm. The t-SNE, PHATE and SNN techniques were each performed using the number of principal components that explains majority of the data variance, based on the “elbow” in plots of the partial variance described by each PC (Not shown). For the integrated analysis of sg-Prkar1a and sg-NTC-treated Rag1−/− cell samples, dimensionality reduction was performed using canonical correlation analysis (CCA). The correlation structure of the two datasets was then aligned using the dynamic time warping method, as described previously. The aligned, integrated data were visualized by t-SNE and clustered using SNN, as before.
Cluster analysis of scRNA-seq data
Cluster-specific marker genes were selected by differential expression analyses for each cluster, relative to all other clusters, using the Model-based Analysis of Single-cell Transcriptomics (MAST) with the Surat R package, filtering the genes to include those with an adjusted-p < 0.01 and within the top absolute fold-change (95th percentile). The cluster-specific markers were then used to compare each cluster population with known immune cells from the Immunological Genome Project data (ImmGen version 1; GEO dataset: GSE15907). More specifically, the marker expression was averaged among cluster/cell type, log-normalized (as described above), and compared between datasets by Kendall correlation analysis (fast approximation method by pcaPP R package), after which, the correlation coefficients from each comparison were scaled and visualized by heatmap (pheatmap R package). In addition, this correlation heatmap data were grouped by ImmGen cell categories, and the specific cell types were arranged within these categories by unsupervised hierarchical clustering.
Tumor cell markers were determined by comparing the NTC-treated Rag1−/− tumor cell bulk RNA-seq transcriptional data with that of the ImmGen innate immune populations, using log-normalized, group-mean, gene-level expression values. The tumor markers were selected as the top 50 genes, based on the tumor/immune cell transcriptional fold-change, that were detected in each scRNA-seq dataset. Four representative tumor cell markers were chosen, after filtering for the genes, based on the detected expression in single-cell data clusters (>= 0.50 detection) and by cluster-specific fold-change (fold-change >= 1.5). Note that these representative genes were among the top 20 tumor markers, and were only selected for t-SNE/PHATE visualization purposes. Lastly, all differential expression analyses were performed by MAST.
Flow cytometry
Flow cytometry analysis of immune populations was performed using a BD FACSAria cytometer. The cell surface antibody staining protocol for the analysis involved blocking Fc receptors with TruStain FcX anti-mouse CD16/32 for 10 min at 4C (1ug/1e6 cells in 100uL staining buffer (0.5% (w/v) BSA, 2mM EDTA in PBS, pH 7.4); Biolegend), washing cells, staining cells with the appropriate fluorophore-conjugated antibodies for 30 minutes at 4C (1uL antibody/1e6 cells in a total volume of 100uL staining buffer), washing cells, and then resuspending in PBS, prior to FACS. Antibodies are listed in Key Resources Table.
Blinding statement
Investigators were blinded for tumor size measurement and histology scoring, but not blinded for screen data analysis, proteomics or RNA-seq.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Standard data analysis (Non-NGS) were performed using regular statistics, where NGS data were analyzed with specific pipelines described in methods under separate sub-headlines. Data comparison between two groups was performed using a two-tailed unpaired t-test or non-parametric Wilcox test. p values and statistical significance were estimated for all analyses. Prism (GraphPad Software Inc.) and RStudio were used for these analyses.
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
Reagent availability
Reagents including plasmids and libraries are available to the academic community through Addgene. Other reagents used in this study are described in Key Resource Table.
Code availability
All custom scripts used to process and analyze the data are available upon reasonable request.
Data availability and accessions
Phosphoproteomics data were deposited into PRIDE database under PXD011837. The mRNA-seq data were deposited into NCBI SRA under PRJNA506858. Single cell RNA-seq were deposited into GEO under PRJNA509929.
Supplementary Material
Institutional approval
All experimental work involving recombinant DNA was performed under the guidelines of Yale University Environmental Health and Safety (EHS) committee with an approved protocol (Chen-rDNA-15–45) All animal work was performed under the guidelines of Yale University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) with approved protocols (Chen-2015–20068; Chen-2018–20068), and was consistent with the Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, National Research Council, 1996 (Institutional Animal Welfare Assurance No. A-3125–01).
Declaration of Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Genome scale in vivo CRISPR screens in different mouse hosts identified genes regulating oncogenesis.
(A) Schematics of experiment. Left, p53−/−;Myc mutated non-malignant hepatocyte cell lines are capable of growing as tumors in immunodeficient Rag1−/− mice with deficiency in both innate and adaptive immune system, however they are rejected by Nu/Nu mice. Right, genome-scale CRISPR screen and validation for mutants that can grow as tumors. Genome-scale CRISPR libraries (mBrie or mGeCKO) mutagenized cell pools have robust tumor growth in Nu/Nu host. Validation of individual gene mutant cells with top hits in mouse hosts with different levels of immune competence.
(B) Tumor growth curves of mBrie library transduced hepatocytes (n = 21), as compared to various injections using the parental cell line (n = 3 each) over a 30 day period (Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test, mBrie vs all controls, p = 7e-4). Error bars are s.e.m.
(C) A color-coded scatterplot showing hit identification for genes whose loss-of-function lead to consistent tumor growth. Screen was performed using a second-generation genome-scale CRISPR knockout library (mBrie) transforming hepatocytes that can grow in fully immunodeficient Rag1−/− mice but not in Nu/Nu mice that have competent innate immunity although lacking mature T cells. Library-transduced cells were capable of escaping the innate immune system and grew as tumors at 100% penetrance. Average sgRNA library representation across all Nu/Nu tumors (n = 21) was plotted against average sgRNA library representation across all cell replicates (n = 3). The 11 top hits that pass all three statistical criteria were plotted as color-coded dots with each dot representing one sgRNA where the same color represents independent sgRNAs for the same gene. Non-targeting control sgRNAs (NTCs) were shown as dark grey dots. Other gene-targeting sgRNAs (GTSs) were shown as light grey dots.
(D) A barplot of the number of independent scoring sgRNAs in the mBrie screen. False-discovery rate (FDR) of 0.2% was used as a cutoff for scoring in each tumor. Four sgRNAs per gene were contained in the mBrie library. Highly consistent hits with >=3 scoring sgRNAs (14 genes with 3/4 scoring sgRNAs, 12 genes with 4/4) were shown.
(E) A Venn diagram showing the overlap of hits identified using three selection criteria, revealing 11 genes significant regardless of criteria. The first criterion is by abundance (i.e. a gene with one or more sgRNA(s) comprising of >=2% total reads in a tumor); the second criterion is by phenotypic penetrance (i.e. a gene with the frequency of one or more sgRNA(s) passing FDR 0.2% cutoff across 25% of all independent tumor samples); the third criteria is by independent construct (i.e. a gene with >=2 sgRNA(s) passing FDR 0.2% cutoff).
(F) RIGER analysis of the genome-scale screen showing top hits.
(G) MAGeCK analysis of the genome-scale screen showing top hits.
See also: Figures S1 and S2.
Convergent screen analysis and validation revealed Prkar1a mutant cancer cell robustly generate tumors in fully immunocompetent host.
(A) Venn diagram showing convergence of two genome-scale in vivo CRISPR screens, with hits identified using the custom 3-Way HitCaller pipeline (Left). The screen was repeated with a genome-scale CRISPR library (mGeCKO) and 5 genes were identified as top hits passing all statistical criteria. The mBrie screen and mGeCKO screen shared 3 hits: Prkar1a, Apc and Tsc2. (Middle) Convergence of two genome-scale in vivo CRISPR screens, with hits identified using RIGER. (Right) Convergence of mBrie in vivo CRISPR screens, showing consistent hits using three different hit calling algorithms (custom 3-Way HitCaller, MAGeCK and RIGER).
(B) Quantification of tumor sizes of top screen hit mutants. (Top) tumor volume measurement of mutants in C57BL/6J host 2 weeks post injection. Prkar1a mutant cells grew rapidly in this host, whereas NTC, Apc, Tsc2 or Csnklal mutants did not (n = 10 each); (Bottom) tumor volume measurement of mutants in Nu/Nu host 2.5 weeks post injection. Two-sided unpaired Mann-Whitney test was used to assess statistical significance for Prkar1a, Apc, Tsc2 or Csnklal mutants, relative to NTC (ns, not significant, i.e.*, p > 0.05; *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001).
(C) Rate of tumor incidence of top screen hit mutants. (Top) tumor incidence rate of mutants in C57BL/6J host. Two-sided Fisher’s exact test was used to assess statistical significance for Prkar1a, Apc, Tsc2 or Csnk1a1 mutants, relative to NTC (ns, not significant, i.e. p > 0.05; *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001).
(D) Representative H&E images of tumors in C. Scale bar, 250 μm.
See also: Figures S2 and S3.
Phosphoproteomic characterization of Prkar1a mutant cells identified its downstream signaling targets.
(A) Schematics of Prkar1a phosphoproteomic experiments. Two independent sets of Prkar1a mutant and NTC control cells were compared using a multiplexed shotgun proteomics approach that included stable isotope labeling using amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), followed by protein extraction, trypsin digestion, TiO2 enrichment of phosphopeptides, cation exchange chromatography (CEX) fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis by LTQ Orbitrap XL. Peptides were subsequently quantified, identified and assembled into groups of proteins, based on shared peptide sequences.
(B) Waterfall plots of the top upregulated and downregulated proteins as MS-identified protein groups in Prkar1a mutants. The protein level changes in Prkar1a mutants (Prkar1a /NTC log2 normalized-protein ratio (nr)) are plotted. As expected, the PRKAR1A protein is among the most downregulated.
(C) Color-coded scatterplot of differential phosphorylation between independent phosphoproteomic experiments. Phosphorylation changes in each Prkar1a mutant sample (Prkar1a /NTC log2 nr) are plotted for each phosphorylation site (PS). Hypo-PS and hyper-PS (> 1.5-fold change) are shown as respective blue and red dots, and top differential PS (ΔPS, > 3-fold change) are labeled with protein symbols.
(D) Western of STAT3 and phospho-STAT3 (pSTAT3) in Prkar1a mutant and NTC cell samples.
(E) Waterfall plots of the top hyper-phoshorylation site (PS) and hypo-PS in Prkar1a mutants (Left and right panels, respectively). The PS changes in Prkar1a mutants (Prkar1a /NTC log2 nr) are labeled with the gene symbol (bold), UniProt accession number and phosphorylated residue (in parentheses), as well as the peptide sequence in a 31 residue window, centered on the PS residue.
(F) Waterfall plot of the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of protein groups with PS changes (DPS; > 1.5-fold change) in Prkar1a mutants. The top ten canonical pathways are ranked by significance (−logi0
p value), and the bar colors represent the activation z score, which is presented to the right of each bar.
(G) Identification of hyper- and hypo-phosphorylation motifs in Prkar1a mutant cells. (Left) Sequence log-odds diagrams (Logos) are shown for hyper-PS (top) or hypo-PS (bottom) motifs that are over-represented in Prkar1a mutant cells. Each motif is presented above the Logo with an asterisk following the PS and a motif score for the enrichment below the motif. (Right) Logos are shown for the top kinase-interacting motifs that match to the identified hyper-PS (top) or hypo-PS (bottom) motifs in Prkar1a mutant cells. Up to four of the top kinase-substrate motifs (Bonferroni-adjusted p < 1e-3) are presented for each PS motif. All kinase-substrate motifs are shown with the significance of the motif match (upper right of each Logo) and the kinase name with phosphorylated residues in parentheses (upper left of each Logo).
Whole transcriptome profiling of Prkar1a mutants identified an upregulated gene expression program of immune response and extracellular protein production.
(A) An overall heatmap of all differentially expressed genes between Prkar1a mutant and control cells. Three independent sgRNAs for Prkar1a and two independent NTCs were subjected to whole transcriptome analysis by mRNA-seq (n = 3 biological replicates for each sgRNA). Differential gene expression (upregulated or downregulated in Prkar1a mutants) is shown by z scores.
(B) A color-coded volcano plot of all differentially expressed transcripts between Prkar1a mutant and control cells. The statistical significance (−log10 FDR-corrected p value) was plotted against the log2 fold-change of normalized gene expression levels. Each dot represents one gene, which are color-coded by the most highly enriched gene sets, described in the legend.
(C) Waterfall plots of most significantly enriched gene ontologies for genes that are upregulated in Prkar1a mutants. The enrichment analysis was performed by the Database of Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID), and the top gene sets are shown, as ranked by FDR-corrected q values. Gene sets including extracellular or secreted proteins emerged on top as most enriched; Gene sets including cAMP catabolic process and response, as well as phosphodiesterase activity indicated the on-target activity of Prkar1a regulated PKA pathway.
(D) A waterfall plot of most significantly enriched gene sets of all Prkar1a upregulated genes. Pathway analysis was performed using GSEA with gene expression levels considered during enrichment calculation (methods), and the top gene sets are shown, as ranked by FDR-corrected q values. Gene sets including acute inflammatory response and molecular mediator of immune response emerged on top as the most significantly enriched ones; the gene set of ribonucleotide catabolic process indicated the on-target activity of Prkar1a regulated PKA pathway; Gene sets are not mutually exclusive.
(E) A GSEA individual pathway analysis plot showing the enrichment of acute inflammatory response genes in the Prkar1a mutant cells as compared to NTC.
(F) A heatmap of all differentially expressed transcripts between Prkar1a mutant and control cells for the genes in the acute inflammatory response category. Relative gene expression levels were shown as z scores.
(G) A heatmap of all differentially expressed transcripts between Prkar1a mutant and control cells for the genes in the proteinaceous extracellular matrix category. Relative gene expression levels were shown as z scores.
(H) A barplot of IL-6 ELISA between Prkar1a mutant and control cells.
See also: Figure S4.
Single cell profiling of Prkar1a mutant tumors in hosts of different immune competence
(A) Schematic for single cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) experiments. IMC9 tumor cells were transfected with sgPrkar1a or NTC to generate Prkar1a knockout or control cells, respectively. Transfected IMC9 cells were then subcutaneously injected into immunocompromised (Rag1−/−), partially immunocompromised (Nu/Nu), and immunocompetent (C57BL/6) mice as shown, and the resulting tumors were extracted, then sorted to CD45+ tumor-infiltrating immune cells and tumor cells that were mixed in a 1:10 ratio for scRNA-seq. One representative mouse in each group was sequenced.
(B) H&E staining of tumors subjected to tumor-immune scRNAseq. Scale bar, 250 μm.
(C) Cellular populations within the tumor microenvironment, visualized by t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) plot of clustered, dimensionality-reduced single-cell transcriptional profiles. Each dot represents a single cell that is arranged relative to other cells based on transcriptional profiles, such that similar cells are grouped together.
See also: Figures S5, S6.
Differential single cell expression analysis of the immune microenvironment in the tumors induced by Prkar1a mutant and control cancer cells in Rag1−/− mice.
(A) t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) visualization of aligned single-cell transcriptional data generated from Prkar1a−/− or NTC tumors in Rag1−/− mice. Cells of the t-SNE plot are labeled by the tumor dataset (top) and by unsupervised clusters that were identified (bottom).
(B) Identification of cell cluster populations based on expression correlation to known immune cell populations. Cluster-specific marker genes were identified as differentially expressed genes (MAST analysis; FDR-adjusted p < 0.001) with the top 95% fold-change between clusters, and the log-normalized mean expression of these marker genes in each cluster was compared by Kendall correlation analysis to ImmGen V1 transcriptional data (85 cell populations of innate immune and stromal cells). The scaled correlation coefficients for the cluster-specific markers are shown for each ImmGen cell population, arranged by unsupervised hierarchical clustering, performed separately within 6 broad cell type categories of the ImmGen data.
(C) Classification of cell clusters by cell type-specific characteristic gene expression patterns, as shown by expression-labeled t-SNE plots. Clusters 1 and 2 are identified as myeloid cell populations by the gene expression of canonical myeloid cell surface markers such as Cd14, Fcgr3 (Cd16), Fcgr2b (Cd32) and Itgam (Cd11b). These clusters also express known markers of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs). Cluster 3 represents the IMC9 cancer cells based on the expression of the previously defined IMC9-specific gene markers including Mgp, Fkbp11, Cdkn2a and Mrpl33.
(D) Volcano plots showing differentially expressed genes in the tumor microenvironment between the myeloid-like immune cells in tumors induced by Prkar1a−/− and control cells. Each panel shows a cluster-specific differential expression analysis, for which the FDR-adjusted p values are shown in the y axes and the log-scale expression fold-changes are shown in the x axes. Differentially expressed genes were defined as those with an adjusted p value < 0.01 and a fold-change > 1.8 in the Prkar1a knockout tumor model. Overexpressed and underexpressed genes are depicted by red and blue points, respectively.
See also: Figure S7.
Flow cytometry analysis of the immune microenvironment in the tumors induced by Prkar1a mutant and control cancer cells.
(A-B) Flow cytometry plots present the differences in the quantities of specific immune cell subsets from tumors that were generated with or without Prkar1a loss.
(A) The gating schemes for the detection of dendritic cells (DCs) and tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are presented using composite flow cytometry data from five sgPrkar1a-generated tumors or six sgNTC-generated tumors in Rag1−/− mice.
(B) Plots show the flow cytometry gating scheme for the quantification of monocytic and polymorphonuclear myeloid-derived suppressor cells (M-MDSCs and PMN-MDSCs, respectively) in tumors that were generated with or without Prkar1a loss. The composite flow cytometry data is shown for eight sgPrkar1a-generated tumors or six sgNTC-generated tumors in Rag1−/− mice.
(C) Quantitative analysis of immune cell infiltration differences between Prkar1a−/− and NTC tumors. Immune cells were quantified from the flow cytometry data in (A-B) and normalized to proportion of CD45/CD45.2+ cells for each tumor. The immune cell populations were compared between Prkar1a−/− and NTC tumors by unpaired t-test with Holm-Sidak correction for multiple-testing. Significant population changes are depicted with asterisks (**, adjustedp < 1e-5).
REAGENT or RESOURCE	SOURCE	IDENTIFIER	 	Antibodies	 	Phospho-Stat3 (Tyr705) (D3A7) XP	Cell Signaling Technologies	Catalog Number: 91455	 	Stat3a (D1A5) XP® Rabbit mAb #8768	Cell Signaling Technologies	Catalog Number: 8768	 	GAPDH antibody	Santa Cruz Biotech	Catalog Number: 32233	 	Ultra-LEAF™ Purified anti-mouse CD3e Antibody (clone: 145-2C11)	Biolegend	Catalog Number: 100340	 	APC anti-mouse CD3e Antibody (clone: 145-2C11)	Biolegend	Catalog Number: 100312	 	FITC anti-mouse Ly-6G/Ly-6C (Gr-1) Antibody (clone: RB6-8C5)	Biolegend	Catalog Number: 108405	 	FITC anti-mouse/human CD11 b Antibody (clone: M1/70)	Biolegend	Catalog Number: 101206	 	PE/Dazzle594 anti-mouse CD11c Antibody (clone: N418)	Biolegend	Catalog Number: 117348	 	PerCP/Cy5.5 anti-mouse I-A/I-E Antibody (clone: m5/114.15.2)	Biolegend	Catalog Number: 107626	 	APC anti-mouse Ly-6C Antibody (clone: HK1.4)	Biolegend	Catalog Number: 128016	 	PE anti-mouse F4/80 Antibody (clone: BM8)	Biolegend	Catalog Number: 123110	 	APC/Cy7 anti-mouse CD45.2 Antibody (clone: 104)	Biolegend	Catalog Number: 109824	 	APC/Cy7 anti-mouse/human CD11b Antibody (clone: M1/70)	Biolegend	Catalog Number: 101225	 	PE/Cy7 anti-mouse CD24 Antibody (clone: M1/69)	Biolegend	Catalog Number: 101822	 	PE/Cy7 anti-mouse CD45 Antibody (clone: 30-F11)	Biolegend	Catalog Number: 103113	 				 	Bacterial and Virus Strains	 	One Shot Stbl3 Chemical Competent E. coli	ThermoFisher	Catalog Number: C737303	 	Endura™ ElectroCompetent Cells	Lucigen	Catalog Number: 60242-2	 				 	Biological Samples			 				 				 	Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins	 				 				 	Critical Commercial Assays	 	Qubit™ dsDNA HS Assay Kit	ThermoFisher	Catalog Number: Q32854	 	Chromium Single Cell	10x Genomics		 	Gibson Assembly® Master Mix	NEB	Catalog Number: E2611	 	Collagenase, Type IV, powder	ThermoFisher	Catalog Number: 17104019	 	QuickExtract DNA Extraction Solution	Epicenter	Catalog Number: QE09050	 	Proteinase K	Sigma-Aldrich	Catalog Number: 3115879001	 	RNAse A	Qiagen	Catalog Number: 19101	 	Phusion Flash High-Fidelity PCR Master Mix	ThermoFisher	Catalog Number: F548L	 	DreamTaq Green PCR Master Mix (2X)	ThermoFisher	Catalog Number: K1082	 	E-Gel™ Low Range Quantitative DNA Ladder	ThermoFisher	Catalog Number: 12373031	 	T7E1	NEB	Catalog Number: M0302L	 	TRIzol™ Plus RNA Purification Kit	ThermoFisher	Catalog Number: 12183555	 	QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit	Qiagen	Catalog Number: Q28706	 				 				 	Deposited Data	 	UniProt C57BL6J UP000000589 proteome (last modified: May 16, 2017)		http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000589	 	PhosphoNetworks kinase phosphorylation motif data		http://www.phosphonetworks.org/download/motifMatrix.csv	 	Immunological Genome Project expression data (version 1)		GEO: GSE15907	 	Mouse genome (mm10)		GEO: GSE63472	 	Prkar1a mutant mRNA-seq	This study	SRA: PRJNA506858	 	Prkar1a mutant proteomics	This study	PRIDE: PXD011837	 	Prkar1a mutant single cell RNA-seq	This study	GEO: PRJNA509929	 				 				 	Experimental Models: Cell Lines	 	HEK293FT	ThermoFisher	Catalog Number: R70007	 	Myc;p53−/− hepatocyte		Clone IM	 	Myc;p53−/− hepatocyte		Clone 172	 				 				 	Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains	 	C57BL/6J	Jackson Laboratory	Catalog Number: 000664	 	Nu/Nu	Jackson Laboratory	Catalog Number: 002019	 	Rag1−/−	Jackson Laboratory	Catalog Number: 002216	 				 	Oligonucleotides	 				 	Recombinant DNA	 	mGeCKOa		https://www.addgene.org/pooled-library/zhang-mouse-gecko-v2/	 	mBrie	Doench et al. 2014	https://www.addgene.org/pooled-library/broadgpp-mouse-knockout-brie/	 				 	Software and Algorithms	 	FlowJo softward 9.9.6	FlowJo, LLC		 	Cutadapt 1.12	Martin et al., 2011	https://github.com/marcelm/cutadapt/	 	Bowtie 1.1.2		https://sourceforge.net/projects/bowtie-bio/files/bowtie/1.1.2	 	GSEA		http://software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/	 	DAVID		https://david.ncifcrf.gov/	 	Scran R package	Lun et al., 2016	https://github.com/MarioniLab/scran/	 	Rtsne R package		https://github.com/jkrijthe/Rtsne/	 	Edge R package	Robinson et al., 2010	https://github.com/StoreyLab/edge/	 	Panther classification system	Mi et al., 2013	http://pantherdb.org/	 	RIGER	Luo et al. 2008	https://software.broadinstitute.org/GENE-E/extensions/RIGER.jar	 	MAGeCK	Li et al. 2014	http://mageck.sourceforge.net	 	Dropseq_tools-1.12		http://mccarrolllab.com/dropseq/	 	Seurat R package		http://satijalab.org/seurat/	 	STAR 2.5.3a		https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR/	 	R: The R Project for Statistical Computing	The R Foundation	https://www.r-project.org/	 	MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1		https://www.biochem.mpg.de/511795/maxquant	 	MEME software suite version 4.12.0		http://meme-suite.org/	 	Tomtom motif comparison		http://meme-suite.org/	 	Kallisto		https://pachterlab.github.io/kallisto/	 	Sleuth		http://pachterlab.github.io/sleuth/	 	Picard 2.9.0	Broad Institute, 2018	http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/	 	Modification Motifs (MoMo)	Cheng et al., 2017 (BioRx)	http://meme-suite.org/	 	Ingenuity Pathway Analysis	Qiagen	https://analysis.ingenuity.com	 	phateR R package	 (BioRx)	https://github.com/KrishnaswamyLab/phateR	 	MAST R package	McDavid et al., 2017	https://github.com/RGLab/MAST/	 	pheatmap R package	Kolde, 2018	https://github.com/raivokoldeZpheatmap	 				 	Other

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PMID 36396656 — mTOR inhibition attenuates chemosensitivity through the induction of chemotherapy resistant persisters.
Nature communications (2022) · https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36396656/

mTOR inhibition attenuates chemosensitivity through the induction of chemotherapy resistant persisters
Chemotherapy can eradicate a majority of cancer cells. However, a small population of tumor cells often survives drug treatments through genetic and/or non-genetic mechanisms, leading to tumor recurrence. Here we report a reversible chemoresistance phenotype regulated by the mTOR pathway. Through a genome-wide CRISPR knockout library screen in pancreatic cancer cells treated with chemotherapeutic agents, we have identified the mTOR pathway as a prominent determinant of chemosensitivity. Pharmacological suppression of mTOR activity in cancer cells from diverse tissue origins leads to the persistence of a reversibly resistant population, which is otherwise eliminated by chemotherapeutic agents. Conversely, activation of the mTOR pathway increases chemosensitivity in vitro and in vivo and predicts better survival among various human cancers. Persister cells display a senescence phenotype. Inhibition of mTOR does not induce cellular senescence per se, but rather promotes the survival of senescent cells through regulation of autophagy and G2/M cell cycle arrest, as revealed by a small-molecule chemical library screen. Thus, mTOR plays a causal yet paradoxical role in regulating chemotherapeutic response; inhibition of the mTOR pathway, while suppressing tumor expansion, facilitates the development of a reversible drug-tolerant senescence state.
Chemotherapy resistance poses a major obstacle in cancer therapy. Here, the authors identify the mTOR pathway as a determinant of chemosensitivity and demonstrate that inhibition of mTOR promotes the persistence of a chemotherapy-resistant cancer-cell subpopulation.
Introduction
Genotoxic damage-inducing chemotherapy is the mainstay treatment for most cancers. Effective chemotherapeutic agents often kill a large fraction of tumor cells, while sparing a small surviving population, which can resurface as future tumor recurrence. Acquired therapeutic resistance occurs due to genetic and/or non-genetic processes. In the context of acute stress resulting from genotoxic chemotherapy, the initial adaptation is essential for tumor cell survival and may allow for subsequent development of chemoresistance through additional genetic and/or non-genetic mechanisms.
An integrator of extracellular signals and cellular response, the mTOR pathway is critical for cellular adaptation to environmental changes. Inhibition of mTOR induces diapause, a reversible arrest in the development of mammalian embryos in response to unfavorable environments. Analogous to its role in regulating physiological diapause, mTOR inhibition may induce a reversibly paused state in cancer cells, leading to drug tolerance and chemoresistance. mTOR inhibition has been shown to be chemoprotective in leukemia cells. Multiple transcriptomic studies have also reported an association between mTOR inhibition and resistance to chemo- and immunotherapies, with post-treatment residual tumors showing decreased mTOR activity. However, the causal and mechanistic role of mTOR inhibition in chemoresistance has yet to be systematically investigated.
Here, we have identified the mTOR pathway as a major determinant of chemosensitivity through a genome-wide CRISPR knockout screen. We show that mTOR inhibition causally leads to the emergence of a reversible drug-tolerant persister population with a senescence phenotype, which is dependent on autophagy and G2/M cell cycle arrest for survival.
Results
CRISPR screen identifies mTOR pathway as a regulator of chemosensitivity
Genome-wide CRISPR screening identifies the mTOR pathway as a determinant of chemosensitivity.
a CRISPR knockout screens in 4292 cells. Dashed bars indicate depleted sgRNAs. b Gene ranking based on β scores in the two screens. Representative top enriched or depleted genes were labeled on the plots. Red and blue indicate significant gene enrichment or depletion with p < 0.05. Two-sided permutation test. False discovery rate (FDR) correction of the p-value was performed by the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. c Overlap of significantly enriched or depleted genes in gemcitabine and selinexor screens. d Enrichment of positive, and depletion of negative regulators of mTOR signaling in gemcitabine and selinexor screens. The mTOR pathway genes were ranked based on the average β score in the two screens. Shown are the top 15 enriched and 10 depleted genes.
To systematically identify the genetic determinants of chemosensitivity, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR knockout screen in a murine pancreatic cancer cell line using two genotoxic chemotherapeutic agents, gemcitabine and selinexor (Fig. 1a). Gemcitabine is a deoxycytidine analog that inhibits DNA synthesis, and selinexor is an inhibitor of chromosome region maintenance 1/exportin 1 (CRM1/XPO1), required for chromosome segregation and mitotic progression. As wild type p53 may interfere with Cas9 function and confound interpretation of chemosensitivity, we utilized the 4292 cell line, derived from a mouse pancreatic cancer model induced by KrasG12D and p53R172H mutants. 4292 cells expressing Cas9 (4292-Cas9) were transduced with the Brie sgRNA library containing 78,637 sgRNAs targeting 19,674 genes, selected with puromycin, and subsequently treated with the two chemotherapeutic agents for 12 days. The screens were performed using relatively low concentrations of the drugs (20 nM for gemcitabine, and 0.33 µM for selinexor), in order to identify in the same screen enriched and depleted genes corresponding to negative and positive regulators of chemosensitivity.
Following deep sequencing of sgRNA libraries, significantly enriched or depleted genes in each screen were identified based on the β score. Notably, a large fraction of the identified genes was shared by the two screens (Fig. 1b, c; Supplementary Data 1a–c). Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment analysis was performed using EnrichR on genes that were significantly changed in both screens. Enriched genes were mainly clustered into protein translation, RNA metabolism and macromolecule biosynthesis, while depleted genes were involved in the negative regulation of mTOR signaling and autophagy (Supplementary Data 1d, e). We specifically examined the β scores of genes involved in mTOR signaling (GO: 0031929), including structural components as well as positive and negative regulators of mTOR complexes. Among the 118 mTOR signaling genes included in the sgRNA library, the top fifteen enriched genes based on average β score of the two CRISPR screens were exclusively involved in the activation of the mTOR pathway, including Mtor, Mios, Telo2, and Raptor; while top ten depleted genes were negative regulators of mTOR signaling, including Tsc1, Tsc2, Stk11, and Nprl2/3 (Fig. 1d). Importantly, most enriched/depleted genes were related to the mTORC1, but not the mTORC2 complex (Supplementary Fig. 1a). To further validate our findings, we reanalyzed a published CRISPR screen performed in REH leukemia cells carrying a TP53 mutation, and confirmed that reduced mTOR pathway activity indeed confers resistance to various DNA damaging agents (Supplementary Fig. 1b). Hence, our CRISPR screen identifies mTOR pathway as a prominent determinant of chemosensitivity.
mTOR inhibition promotes the emergence of drug-tolerant persisters
mTOR inhibition induces reversible chemoresistant persisters.
a 4292 cells were treated with chemotherapeutic agents (2μM gemcitabine, 2 μM selinexor), or chemotherapeutic agents plus a panel of mTOR inhibitors (rapamycin, everolimus, INK128, and Torin1 at 100 nM, and JR-AB2-011 at 1 μM) for seven days. Shown are representative images of cell survival and morphology from three biological replicates. The average cell count per image is indicated in the lower right corner. Scale bar, 100 μm. b Microscopic images of human cancer cells treated with Torin1 plus chemotherapeutic agents (100 nM gemcitabine for MIA PaCa-2 and 10 nM paclitaxel for MeWo for nine days; 60μM irinotecan for HeLa and 100 nM mitoxantrone for DU145 for seven days). The images are representative of three biological replicates. The average cell count per image is indicated in the lower right corner. Scale bar, 100 μm. c Reversibility of chemoresistance in persister cells. Treatment (Rx), recovery, and reseeding were repeated for five cycles. Y axis represents cell number in a 50X field (0.64 mm2 of culture area). For each data point, a minimum of three independent fields were counted and cell numbers were plotted as mean ± SEM. d Transcriptomic comparison of persister vs control and recovery vs control. Blue dots represent differentially expressed genes (DEG) that change at least 4-fold, while grey dots indicate non-DEG. Two-sided Wald test. p < 0.001, adjusted by the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure. e Violin plots of the GSEA results in residual vs primary tumors for multiple human cancer types using the MP signature. BC: breast cancer (GSE87455), AML: acute myeloid leukemia (GSE40442), REC: rectal cancer (GSE15781), EADC: esophageal cancer (GSE165252). NES: normalized enrichment scores. f Representative GSEA plot for patient #115 in the breast cancer dataset (GSE87455). Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, p < 0.0001. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.
To examine the role of mTOR in regulating chemosensitivity, we compared the efficacy of single-agent chemotherapy to chemotherapy plus mTOR inhibitors (mTORi). 4292 cells were treated with single-agent gemcitabine or selinexor to determine the concentrations that would completely eradicate tumor cells within seven days. We then treated the cells with each drug as a single agent at the killing concentrations, as well as in combination with rapamycin, and monitored their survival over the course of two weeks. Interestingly, combined treatment, while killing a large fraction of the cells, led to a subpopulation of survivors (Fig. 2a). Emergence of the drug-tolerant population was further confirmed using additional rapalogs specific to mTORC1 (temsirolimus and everolimus), as well as mTORC1/2 dual inhibitors (Torin1 and INK128). In contrast, the mTORC2-specific inhibitor, JR-AB2-011, failed to induce the drug-tolerant subpopulation, indicating that the reduced mTORC1, but not mTORC2 activity, leads to chemoresistance (Fig. 2a). The function of these mTORi were confirmed by Western blot analysis (Supplementary Fig. 2a-d). In the presence of drug treatment, surviving tumor cells remained dormant and viable for over three weeks (the longest time of observation), herein referred to as “persisters”.
To determine whether the induction of persisters following mTOR inhibition is a general phenomenon, we treated human pancreatic cancer MIA PaCa-2 cells with a diverse panel of chemotherapeutic agents. mTOR inhibition led to the emergence of persisters in the majority of agents tested, including doxorubicin (anthracycline), selinexor (XPO1 inhibitor), paclitaxel (antimicrotubule), etoposide (topoisomerase II inhibitor), mitoxantrone (anthracycline), and irinotecan (topoisomerase I inhibitor) (Supplementary Fig. 2e). The effects of mTOR inhibition were further evaluated in an additional panel of 29 human cancer cell lines from diverse tissue origins, including pancreatic, breast, prostate, colon, liver, lung, ovarian, cervical cancers and melanoma. Treatment with chemotherapeutic agents and mTOR inhibitors led to the emergence of persisters in the majority of these cells. Cell lines that failed to show the drug-tolerant subpopulation were mostly TP53 wild type (MCF7, HCT116, H460, A549, A375, and HepG2), indicating that induction of the drug-tolerant state by mTOR inhibition may be a common feature of human cancers with TP53 mutations (Fig. 2b, Supplementary Table 1, Supplementary Data 2). To further examine the role of TP53 status in the persister phenotype, we lentivirally expressed p53R273H and p53R249S mutants in A375 and HCT116 cells. Interestingly, treatments with gemcitabine or paclitaxel plus Torin1 in the two cell lines transduced with mutant p53 led to the emergence of persisters (Supplementary Fig. 2f, g).
We focused on the MIA PaCa-2 model to further examine the drug tolerant phenotype. Following drug removal, a fraction of the persisters resumed proliferation (Supplementary Fig. 3a). Recovered cells were sensitive to gemcitabine and completely eradicated by gemcitabine treatment alone, while combined treatment with gemcitabine and Torin1 again led to the emergence of survivors. The treatment-recovery was continued for five cycles and persisters consistently appeared following each cycle of chemotherapy plus mTOR inhibition (Fig. 2c). The persister phenotype was further validated in three independent single-cell clones derived from MIA PaCa-2 cells, and induction of persisters and phenotypic reversibility was similarly observed in each clone (Supplementary Fig. 3b). These results indicate that the drug-tolerant cells arise de novo upon non-genetic adaptation and are unlikely to derive from rare clones with preexisting genetic mutations. Additionally, we compared the transcriptomes of control, Torin1-treated, persisters, and recovered cells (persisters that were cultured in drug-free media for an additional 11 days) (Supplementary Data 3a–d). Interestingly, the transcriptional profiles of Torin1-treated cells and persisters are highly depleted for MYC target gene expression, G2/M cell cycle, mitotic transition, and mTOR signaling, according to the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) of the 50 hallmark gene sets (Supplementary Fig. 3c). While control and persisters differ drastically in their gene expression pattern, only modest differences are observed between the control and recovered cells (Fig. 2d). These results suggest that persisters largely revert to the cellular state of the pre-treatment control following drug removal. The acquired resistance following mTOR inhibition is, therefore, unlikely mediated by stable genetic changes, but a consequence of an mTOR inhibition-induced adaptive response to chemotherapeutic stress.
To examine the relevance of the persister phenotype in clinical cancer treatments, we derived an mTOR-regulated persister (MP) signature by identifying the common transcriptomic changes in the Torin1-treated vs control and persister vs control comparisons. The MP signature consisting of 403 upregulated (MP up) and 213 downregulated genes (MP down) was used in GSEA of public transcriptomes of residual tumors following chemotherapy from several cancer types, including breast, rectal, and esophageal cancers, and acute myeloid leukemia. Significantly, the upregulated MP genes were enriched, while the downregulated MP genes were depleted in the transcriptomes of residual tumors (Fig. 2e, f; Supplementary Data 4a, b), suggesting that the mTOR-regulated persister state may be responsible for the minimal residual disease phenotype following clinical cancer chemotherapy.
mTOR Activation increases chemosensitivity
mTOR activation confers chemosensitivity in vitro and in vivo.
a Western analysis of single-cell clones of TSC1 and TSC2 knockouts derived from MIA PaCa-2 cells. Two wild-type (WT), seven TSC1 knockout (TSC1 KO), and three TSC2 knockout (TSC2 KO) clones were generated. TSC1, TSC2, phospho-S6-S235/236, and S6 proteins were probed to show genomic ablation and mTORC1 activity. β-tubulin serves as the loading control. Experiment performed with three biological replicates. b MCA of wild type mixed with TSC1 or TSC2 knockout clones in the presence or absence of 30 nM gemcitabine or 300 nM selinexor for three, six, and nine days. Data plotted as mean ± SEM. Experiments were performed with three biological replicates. Two-tailed Student’s T test, *p < 0.05. The p values for untreated vs gemcitabine-treated TSC1 KO#4, TSC1 KO#6, TSC2 KO #1, and TSC2 KO#3 are 0.021, 0.018, 0.021, and 0.012. The corresponding p values for selinexor treatment are 0.043, 0.024, 0.016, and 0.018. c Representative images from three MCA biological replicates on day 6. Scale bar, 50 μm. d Fold changes in tumor size based on BLI quantification following gemcitabine treatment in wild type (N = 24) and TSC2 knockout (N = 23) tumors grown in NSG hosts. Data plotted as mean ± SEM. Two-tailed Student’s T test, p = 3.67e-06. e Survival of NSG mice bearing wild type and TSC2 knockout tumors with (solid line) or without (dashed line) gemcitabine treatment for four weeks. N = 24 for wild type and N = 23 for TSC2 knockout in the treatment group, and N = 10 for both wild type and TSC2 knockout in the non-treated group. Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test, p = 5.17e-08. f Survival analysis of human pancreatic cancer patients based on RPPA analysis of phospho-mTOR-S2448 in tumors. RPPA data from TCGA study were analyzed using the TRGAted application. N = 23 for the high group and N = 82 for the low group. Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test, p = 0.0014. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.
Having demonstrated that mTOR inhibition promotes the development of drug-tolerant persisters, we further examined whether activation of mTOR pathway could conversely increase chemosensitivity. We used CRISPR to knock out two genetic suppressors of mTOR, TSC1, and TSC2, in MIA PaCa-2 cells. Western analysis confirmed the loss of TSC1 or TSC2 expression and activation of the mTORC1 pathway as indicated by increased S6 phosphorylation (Fig. 3a). We labeled the wild type clones with red fluorescent protein (RFP) and TSC1/TSC2 knockout clones with green fluorescent protein (GFP), and mixed at a one to one ratio in a multicolor competition assay (MCA). Treatment with gemcitabine or selinexor selectively eradicated the knockout clones as shown by the disappearance of GFP positive cells, while the GFP/RFP ratio did not change significantly in the untreated populations (Fig. 3b, c).
To assess the chemosensitivity in vivo, we transplanted wild-type and TSC2−/− MIA PaCa-2 cells into immunodeficient NOD scid gamma (NSG) mice. Despite four weeks of gemcitabine treatment, wild-type tumors expanded four-fold according to bioluminescence imaging (BLI) quantification. Interestingly, significant shrinkage was observed in the majority of TSC2−/− tumors (Fig. 3d, Supplementary Fig. 4a, Supplementary Data 5). The increased chemosensitivity upon mTOR activation translated into better survival of mice bearing TSC2−/− tumors following chemotherapy compared to those with wild-type tumors, whereas the non-treated cohorts did not show the difference in survival (Fig. 3e). Furthermore, analysis of the reverse phase protein array (RPPA) data in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project points to a significant survival benefit in pancreatic cancer patients with high mTOR protein expression in their tumors (hazard ratio = 0.381, p = 0.022). In particular, high levels of phospho-mTOR-S2448, indicative of mTOR kinase activity, is remarkably correlated with better overall survival (hazard ratio = 0.29, p = 0.0014) and progress-free survival (hazard ratio = 0.414, p = 0.00049) in pancreatic cancer, as well as multiple other cancer types, including lung, liver, kidney, prostate, cervical cancers, and melanoma (Fig. 3f, Supplementary Fig. 4b). Taken together, mTOR inhibition promotes drug tolerance, while activation of the mTOR pathway increases chemosensitivity, and is predictive of improved clinical survival in cancer patients.
Persister cells display a senescence phenotype
Persister cells display a senescence phenotype.
a Representative images of SABG staining of MIA PaCa-2 cells treated for eight days with 100 nM Torin1, or Torin1 plus chemotherapeutic agents (100 nM gemcitabine, 2 μM selinexor, 6 μM etoposide, and 6 μM irinotecan). Scale bar, 50 μm. Experiments were performed with three biological replicates. b Quantification of SABG positive cells in control, Torin1, or Torin1 plus chemotherapy samples. The experiment was performed with three biological replicates. Data were plotted as mean ± SEM. Two-tailed Student’s T test. **p < 0.001; *p < 0.01; n.s: not significant. p values for the Gem + T, Sel + T, Eto + T, and Iri + T treatments vs control sets are 5.16e-05, 0.001, 7.61e-05, and 8.92e-06. c, d Flow cytometric quantification of SABG activity using the C12-FDG fluorescent substrate in MIA PaCa-2 cells treated with 100 nM Torin1 or 100 nM gemcitabine plus Torin1 for nine days. Grey dashed line indicates the unstained control. Experiment was performed with three biological replicates. Data plotted as mean ± SEM. Two-tailed Student’s T test. **p = 0.0002; n.s: not significant. MFI: mean fluorescence intensity. e Western analysis of senescence markers in cells treated for nine days with Torin1 or Torin1 plus chemotherapeutic agents (100 nM gemcitabine, 6 μM etoposide, and 6 μM irinotecan). Experiment was repeated once with similar results. f Heatmap of cytokine secretion in MIA PaCa-2 cells following a nine-day treatment with 100 nM Torin1, or Torin1 plus chemotherapeutic agents (100 nM gemcitabine, 2 μM selinexor, 6 μM etoposide, and 6 μM irinotecan). Cytokines were detected using the Luminex assays. Asterisks indicate SASP (senescence-associated secretory phenotype) cytokines upregulated in persisters. g Senescence scores for control, Torin1-treated, persisters, and recovered cells analyzed using the Cancer SENESCopedia senescence classifier. RNA-seq experiments for each condition inlude three biological replicates. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.
Persisters have a distinctly enlarged and flattened morphology, reminiscent of the human fibroblasts undergoing replicative senescence. We, therefore, examined these cells for the molecular changes and phenotypic features associated with senescence. Flow cytometric analysis detected an approximately 4- and 6-fold increase in the forward scatter (FSC) and side scatter (SSC) in the persisters compared to the control, consistent with the characteristic cell size and granularity of senescent cells (Supplementary Fig. 5a). Torin1-treated cells demonstrated a modest increase in FSC and SSC compared to the non-treated control. Canonical senescence-associated β-galactosidase (SABG) assay revealed extensive staining in the persisters but not in control or Torin1-treated cells (Fig. 4a, b, Supplementary Fig. 5b, c). Flow cytometric quantification of SABG activity with the 5-dodecanoylaminofluorescein di-β-D-galactopyranoside (C12-FDG) substrate showed a 4-fold higher mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) in persister cells, while Torin1-treated cells did not differ from the control (Fig. 4c, d, Supplementary Fig. 5d). The senescent phenotype was also confirmed by drastic induction of p21 and γH2AX and silencing of lamin B1 protein expression in persisters as shown by Western analysis (Fig. 4e). These markers remained unchanged in Torin1-treated cells, indicating the lack of senescence induction upon mTOR inhibition. Additionally, persister cells displayed a typical senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) as revealed by Luminex detection of secreted cytokines. A minimum of 4-fold induction by the combination treatments was observed in multiple cytokines commonly associated with SASP, including CCL2, CCL26, G-CSF, MIF, FGF2, and CXCL5 (Fig. 4f). Finally, analysis of our transcriptomic data set utilizing a highly specific senescence classifier, clearly categorized the persisters as the senescent population (score of 0.99), while control, Torin1-treated, and recovered cells did not show any sign of senescence (scores less than 0.01) (Fig. 4g). Taken together, drug-tolerant persister cells display a prominent senescence phenotype according to multiple independent assays. Importantly, persister cells recovered and re-established the tumor cell population following drug removal with complete reversibility, demonstrating a cellular state distinctly different from the replicative senescence with irreversible cell cycle arrest.
A small-molecule chemical library screen reveals survival mechanisms of persisters
Multifaceted survival mechanisms in persisters revealed by a small-molecule chemical screen.
a Effects of inhibitors on survival of MIA PaCa-2 persister and parental cells. Each chemical was plotted based on its effects on parental and persister survival. For each drug, survival data were normalized to untreated parental and persister cells. Dashed circles indicate four major groups of drugs modulating persister survival. b Representative images of persister survival following treatment with inhibitors in the chemical library. MIA PaCa-2 persisters were induced by the combined treatment with 100 nM gemcitabine and 100 nM Torin1 for nine days. HeLa persisters were induced by treatment with 60 μM irinotecan and 100 nM Torin1 for seven days. Experiments were performed in three biological replicates. Shown are inhibitors of G2/M checkpoint, autophagy, and S6K, including 100 nM adavosertib, 100 nM CHIR124, 10 μM ceralasertib, 10 μM chloroquine, and 30 μM bisindolylmaleimide V for MIA PaCa-2, and 3 μM PD 407824, 1 μM prexasertib HCl, 300 nM berzosertib, 10 μM chloroquine, and 1 μM LY2584702 for HeLa cells. The average cell count per image is indicated in the lower right corner. Scale bar, 100 μm.
To identify the survival mechanisms in persisters, we performed a chemical library screen in the persister model of MIA PaCa-2 cells treated with gemcitabine and Torin1 for nine days, using a small-molecule library with approximately 200 inhibitors for various druggable targets and cellular processes (Supplementary Data 6a). Each inhibitor was tested in a serial dilution in both parental and persister cells. While most inhibitors did not affect persister survival, a few compounds modulating G2/M checkpoint, autophagy, and cell death pathways (apoptosis and ferroptosis) selectively eradicated persisters, with minimal effect on the parental cells (Fig. 5, Supplementary Fig. 6a, b; Supplementary Data 6b). Inhibitors of autophagy, such as chloroquine, bafilomycin A1, SAR405 (VPS34 inhibitor), and MRT68921 (ULK1/2 inhibitor), efficiently eradicated persisters. Inhibition of multiple key G2/M cell cycle checkpoint regulators, including CHK1, ATR, and WEE1, also eliminated the persisters. Interestingly, multiple chemicals targeting CDK4/6, PDGFRs, PDK1, RSKs, and S6Ks, increased the persister population (Fig. 5, Supplementary Fig. 6a, b; Supplementary Data 6b). Kinases, such as PDK1, RSKs, and S6Ks, functionally converge on the S6K/S6 downstream of mTORC1 pathway, suggesting that the emergence of persisters following mTOR inhibition may be due to reduced S6K function. Thus, our chemical screen identifies the multifaceted survival mechanisms in persisters.
Sensitivity to autophagy and G2/M checkpoint inhibitors was confirmed in MIA PaCa-2 persisters induced by treatment with selinexor, etoposide, irinotecan, and doxorubicin plus Torin1, with the addition of chemical inhibitors at the beginning of the treatment or following the emergence of persisters, equally blocked their survival (Supplementary Fig. 6c, d). Sensitivity to autophagy and G2/M checkpoint inhibitors was further demonstrated in additional cancer types (Supplementary Fig. 6e). In parallel to the sensitivity to autophagy inhibitors, we indeed observed strong evidence of autophagy induction in persisters based on Western analysis of protein markers (phospho-CREB, phospho-ATG14, and LC3), detection of LC3 puncta using a dual-color DsRed-LC3-GFP fluorescent reporter, and GSEA of transcriptomes (Supplementary Fig. 7a–e).
mTOR inhibition potentiates G2/M cell cycle arrest to promote persister survival
mTOR inhibition potentiates G2/M cell cycle arrest and promotes persister survival.
a, b Cell cycle tracking with FUCCI reporter in control, Torin1-treated, and persister cells. Cells were treated with 100 nM Torin1, or Torin1 plus chemotherapeutic agents (100 nM gemcitabine, 2 μM selinexor, 6 μM etoposide, and 6 μM irinotecan) for nine days. Experiments were performed with three biological replicates. Data plotted as mean ± SEM. Scale bar, 50 μm. c Western blot analysis of key proteins involved in G2/M checkpoint activation and G2/M cell cycle progression. MIA PaCa-2 cells were treated with 100 nM gemcitabine, 100 nM Torin1, or the combination for the indicated days. The experiment was repeated once with similar results. d Western blot analysis of phospho-CHK1-S345 and PLK1 in MIA PaCa-2 cells treated with 100 nM Torin1 or Torin1 plus chemotherapeutic agents (100 nM gemcitabine, 2 μM selinexor, 6 μM etoposide, and 6 μM irinotecan) for nine days. The experiment was repeated once with similar results. e GSEA of G2/M transition signature (GOBP_CELL_CYCLE_G2_M_PHASE_TRANSITION from MSigDB) in Torin1-treated and persister cells. Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, p < 0.0001. f Expression of G2/M phase-specific transcripts in control, Torin1-treated, and persister cells. Genes were derived from the GSEA G2/M transition signature in Fig. 6e. Key regulators of G2/M transition are labeled. The color bar represents scale for log2 fold changes. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.
Our chemical screen identified multiple G2/M checkpoint inhibitors targeting CHK1, ATR, and WEE1, effectively eliminating the persisters, indicating that G2/M cell cycle arrest is essential for persister survival. In a recent study, acute myeloid leukemia cells treated with chemotherapy persisted through a senescence-like state, which was effectively targeted by ATR inhibitors. We, therefore, assessed the cell cycle distribution of persisters to unravel the survival mechanisms involving G2/M regulation. Flow cytometric analysis of persisters induced by multiple drug combinations showed prominent G2/M cell cycle arrest and polyploidy (Supplementary Fig. 8). Following release from the combined treatments, persisters resumed normal proliferation and displayed cell cycle profiles comparable to that of control cells. Using a fluorescent ubiquitination-based cell cycle indicator (FUCCI) reporter, we showed that treatment with chemotherapy plus Torin1 resulted in G2/M cell cycle arrest, while Torin1-treated cells were predominantly in G1/S phase (Fig. 6a, b). In addition, induction of phospho-CHK1 (S345) and phospho-WEE1 (S642) pointed to activation of G2/M checkpoint in persisters (Fig. 6c, d). In contrast to the G2/M checkpoint activation, expression of G2/M transition genes was drastically downregulated in persister cells. Western blot analysis showed significant reduction in PLK1 and cyclin B1 protein levels in persisters, similar to Torin1-treated cells (Fig. 6c, d). Furthermore, GSEA of the transcriptomic data revealed depletion of transcripts involved in G2/M transition in both Torin1-treated and persister cells (Fig. 6e, f). Thus, the significant downregulation of genes involved in G2/M transition by mTOR inhibition could delay premature mitotic entry, thereby avoiding cell death by mitotic catastrophe. Concordantly, in a previous study, mTOR inhibition potentiated cell cycle arrest after irradiation through the transcriptional downregulation of cyclin B1 and PLK1, leading to increased survival of cancer cells following DNA damage. Thus, regulation of the G2/M cell cycle arrest by mTOR inhibition mechanistically contributes to the survival of persisters.
Discussion
We have identified the mTOR pathway as a key regulator of chemosensitivity through CRISPR screening. Chemotherapeutic treatment in the presence of mTOR inhibition induces a drug-tolerant persister population with a senescence phenotype, the survival of which is dependent on autophagy and G2/M cell cycle arrest. Conversely, activation of the mTOR pathway confers increased chemosensitivity in cancer cells with genetic ablation of TSC1/2. Additionally, activated mTOR signaling, as indicated by phospho-mTOR-S2448 levels in patients’ tumors predicts better clinical survival among multiple cancer types. This notion is further supported by the reports of increased sensitivity to DNA damage-inducing therapies in cancer patients with mTOR activation caused by germline and/or somatic mutations of TSC1/2. These observations demonstrate that mTOR activation confers a heightened chemosensitivity, despite its well-characterized oncogenic functions in tumorigenesis.
Persisters display a senescence phenotype similar to the physiological diapause, and distinct from replicative senescence with irreversible arrest. mTOR is shown to causally regulate diapause during mouse blastocyst development. More recently, colorectal cancer cells reportedly enter a diapause-like drug-tolerant persister state, concomitant with the reduction of mTOR signaling. The functional roles of mTOR in physiological diapause upon nutritional deprivation and chemotherapy-induced senescence are likely similar, both involving induction of autophagy and cell cycle arrest. Under physiological diapause, mTOR inhibition induces autophagy and dormancy to support long-term survival and pluripotency of blastocysts. Under the stress of chemotherapy, mTOR inhibition promotes cancer cells to adopt a reversible drug-tolerant senescence state, which supports survival and allows for effective DNA repair, but incidentally, leading to chemoresistance and tumor recurrence.
The mTOR pathway is widely deemed as an appealing cancer therapeutic target. However, the expectation has not been met in clinical trials. Among more than 500 trials using mTOR inhibitors as a single agent or in combination with other drugs, few have demonstrated clinical benefit. Not surprisingly, FDA approval of mTOR inhibitors, including everolimus and temsirolimus, is only limited to the control of late-stage tumor expansion in a few specific cancers. We observe that mTOR suppression promotes the induction of persisters in various cancer cells undergoing chemotherapy and dampens therapeutic efficacy. Similarly, others have shown that mTOR inhibition is chemoprotective in leukemia cells. Thus, the use of mTOR inhibitors can be counterproductive in the context of chemotherapy. This may explain the general lack of efficacy of mTOR inhibitors in cancer clinical trials and argues against their widespread use in combination with DNA damage-inducing agents. In this light, stimulation of mTOR signaling, but not its inhibition, may be the strategy of choice to reduce residual tumors and improve chemotherapeutic efficacy.
The paradoxical roles of oncogenes in regulating therapeutic responses is not limited to mTOR. Overexpression of MYC oncogene, while inducing aggressive tumor behavior, in fact leads to increased chemosensitivity. Additionally, silencing MYC induces a diapause-like cellular state that is chemoresistant. Indeed, Myc is one of the highly enriched hits in our CRISPR screen (Fig. 1b). Tumor suppressor activity may confer chemoresistance. Disruption of the p53 tumor suppressor enhances sensitivity to multiple chemotherapeutic agents, while its expression results in chemoresistance in various cancer types. Similarly, attenuation of the RB tumor suppressor leads to aggressive tumorigenic growth accompanied by increased chemosensitivity. Regulation of chemoresistance by oncogenes and tumor suppressors may mechanistically converge on senescence as MYC inhibition and p53/RB activation are known inducers of senescence. Depending on the cellular contexts, suppression of oncogenes or activation of tumor suppressors may not result in tumor eradication via various forms of cell death but instead lead to tumor persistence through a reversible senescence state, thus promoting tumor recurrence. The seemingly paradoxical roles of oncogenes and tumor suppressors in regulating tumor growth and therapeutic sensitivity may be a common theme.
Methods
Mice
This study complies with all the relevant ethical regulations. All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at Houston Methodist Research Institute and were performed in accordance with institutional and national guidelines. Approximately four million firefly luciferase-labelled MIA PaCa-2 WT and TSC2 KO cells were mixed with Matrigel and transplanted subcutaneously in 6–8 week old NSG female and male hosts (n = 24 for wild type and n = 23 for TSC2 KO). Tumors were allowed to grow for three weeks prior to gemcitabine treatment (100 mg/kg, twice per week) for four weeks. Post-treatment survival was monitored for six weeks. BLI was performed on an IVIS Lumina III platform. Data were analyzed using the Living Image software (v4.2). In addition, 10 mice were included for wild type and TSC2 KO tumors in the non-treated control cohorts. All mice were maintained under standard conditions, at ambient temperature, 60% humidity, 12 h light/dark cycles and received a standard diet and water ad libitum. Mice were euthanized by CO2 exposure followed by cervical dislocation when the tumor diameter reached 1.5 cm, the maximal tumor size allowed by the IACUC committee.
Cell lines and chemical reagents
The 4292 murine PDAC cell line was a gift from Dr. Marina Pasca di Magliano. For human cell lines, MIA PaCa-2 (#85052806), PANC-1 (#87092802) and SCC47 (#SCC071) were from Sigma, MDA-MB-231 (#36) and SK-OV-3 (#43) were from MD Anderson, HeLa (#CCL-2), DU145 (#HTB-81), MeWo (#HTB-65), BxPC3 (#CRL-1687), Capan-2 (#HTB-80), LNCaP (#CRL-1740), C4-2B (#CRL-3315), 22Rv1 (#CRL2505), PC3 (#CRL-1435), T-47D (#HTB-133), MCF7 (#HTB-22), SK-BR-3 (#HTB-30), PLC/PRF/5 (#CRL-8024), SNU398 (#CRL-2233), Hep3B (#HB-8064), HepG2 (#HB-8065), A375 (CRL#1619), HCT116 (#CCL-247), SW480 (#CCL-228), H460 (#HTB-177), A549 (#CCL-185), H1299 (#CRL-5803), H441 (#HTB-174), U2OS (#HTB-96), AsPC-1 (#CRL1682) were from ATCC. Cell lines were authenticated by short tandem repeat profiling and tested as negative for mycoplasma contamination by PCR at the MD Anderson Cancer Center cell line core. With the exception of T47D, MDA-MB-231, C4-2B, DU145, H460, and 22Rv1, which were cultured in RPMI-1640, and PC3 in F-12K, all cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin in a 5% CO2 humidified incubator. Gemcitabine, 5-fluorouracil, paclitaxel, carboplatin, Torin1, rapamycin, everolimus, temsirolimus, bafilomycin A1, chloroquine, MHY1485 were purchased from Cayman Chemical. Selinexor, SAR405, and MRT68921 were obtained from Selleckchem. All chemicals for the small-molecule library screening were purchased from Cayman Chemical.
CRISPR Cas9 genome-wide library screening
CRISPR library screen was performed in biological replicates following a published protocol. 4292 cells were infected with lentiCas9-Blast (Addgene #52962). Following blasticidin selection, cells were infected at a low viral titer with the pooled mouse CRISPR lentiviral library containing 78,637 gRNAs targeting 19,674 genes (Addgene #73633-LV). Infected cells were selected with puromycin (1 μg/ml) for two days. The experimental pools were treated with gemcitabine (20 nM) or selinexor (0.33 μM) for 12 days. All cell pools were passaged every three days with at least 50 million cells per pool to ensure a minimum of 500x coverage. Following drug treatment, sgRNA libraries in the cell populations were isolated by PCR amplification and identified by Hiseq. Computational analysis of the sgRNA libraries was performed using MAGeCK (version 0.5.9.2) as reported.
CRISPR knockout
The guide RNAs targeting specific genes were designed using CHOPCHOP (https://chopchop.cbu.uib.no/). Two sgRNAs were cloned in pSpCas9(BB)−2A-GFP (PX458) (Addgene, #48138). MIA PaCa-2 cells were transiently transfected with an equimolar mixture of the sgRNAs using lipofectamine 3000 (Thermo Fisher). Three days after transfection, GFP positive cells were sorted for single cells on a BD FACS Aria cell sorter (BD Biosciences). Gene knockout was confirmed by genomic DNA PCR and Western analysis. The sgRNA sequences are:
hTSC1-ACGAGATAGACTTCCGCCACG
hTSC1-BAGTCGGTGGGAGACGACTAT
hTSC1-CGACGTCGTTGTCCTCACAAC
hTSC1-DTACCAATGATTCCACAGTCT
hTSC2-ACGTCTGCGACTACATGTACG
hTSC2-BAGGAGACGACTCGCTCGATG
hTSC2-CCGTCCGGACCGCGTCCTCTG
hTSC2-DCTGTCGCACCATCAACGTCA.
Expression of p53 mutants
The two mutant constructs (pLenti6/V5-p53_R273H, Addgene #22934; pLenti6/V5-p53_R249S, Addgene #22935) were lentivirally delivered to the A375 and HCT116 cells. Cells were selected with blasticidin (A375, 5 µg/mL; HCT116, 10 µg/mL) for one week before testing for the persister phenotype. Expression of the mutants was confirmed by Western blot analysis.
SABG staining
MIA PaCa-2 and MDA-Panc-28 cells were plated in 24-well plates at 10,000 cells/well and treated with chemotherapeutic agents and Torin1 the next day. Following eight (MIA PaCa-2) or six (MDA-Panc-28) days of drug treatment, cells were stained using Senescence Cells Histochemical Staining Kit (Sigma #CS0030) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Nine images from each well were acquired and positively stained cells were manually counted.
Luminex assay of secreted cytokines
Secretome analysis was performed using Luminex Human 80 plex (EMD-Millipore) at Stanford Human Immune Monitoring Center. Cell culture media were changed three days before sample collection. For each sample, levels of cytokines were normalized to the media volume and cell number. All cytokine detections were performed in technical duplicates.
RNA-seq analysis
MIA PaCa-2 untreated cells (control), treated with 100 nM Torin1 (Torin1-treated), or 100 nM Torin1 and 100 nM gemcitabine (persisters) for nine days, and persister cells that were grown in drug free media for 11 days (recovery) were used for RNA-seq analysis. Total RNA was extracted using Qiagen RNeasy Plus kit (Qiagen). Library construction and total RNA sequencing were performed commercially (Novogene). For RNA-seq data analysis, kallisto (version 0.46.2) was used to pseudoalign paired-end reads to a reference transcriptome with 100 bootstraps. The reference transcriptome used to build the kallisto index consisted of the “Protein-coding transcript sequences” and “Long non-coding RNA transcript sequences” FASTA files from Human Release 38 (GRCh38.p13) of GENCODE. The corresponding GENCODE human primary assembly GTF file was used as an annotation file. The R library, sleuth (version 0.30.0), was used to produce normalized gene-level abundance estimates and perform differential gene expression analysis.
GSEA using the mTOR-regulated persister signature and the Hallmark gene sets
To generate the mTOR-regulated persister signature from the RNA-seq data, we first derived the genes differentially expressed in Torin1-treated and persister cells (two-fold changes at an adjusted p < 0.01). The overlap of the two differentially expressed gene sets was defined as the mTOR-regulated persister signature, which includes both upregulated and downregulated genes (MP up and MP down) (Supplementary Data 4a). GSEA of the public datasets (GSE87455 for breast cancer, GSE165252 for esophageal cancer, GSE15781 for rectal cancer, and GSE40442 for acute myeloid leukemia) was performed using our MP signature on post-chemotherapy residual tumors vs pre-treatment primary tumors. The normalized enrichment scores (NES) for both MP up and MP down signatures in the three public data sets were plotted using GraphPad Prism (version 8.4.2). Comparison of the persister vs control and Torin1-treated vs control transcriptomes was carried out with the “Hallmark gene sets” (50 sets) from MSigDB collections. GSEA analysis was performed using GSEA_4.1.0 from http://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/downloads.jsp
Cell cycle analysis using FUCCI reporter
FUCCI reporter (Addgene #86849) was stably expressed in MIA PaCa-2 cells by lentiviral transduction. Cells were seeded in 24-well plates and treated the next day with indicated drugs for nine days. At least nine representative images of each condition were captured on an FV3000 confocal microscope equipped with Olympus FV31S software and analyzed using the Olympus CellSens Dimension package. Magenta and green colors indicate distribution in G1/S and S/G2/M phase, respectively.
Survival analysis of patients’ RPPA data in TCGA
Survival analysis of patients’ samples was based on the reverse-phase protein array (RPPA) data on mTOR and phospho-mTOR-S2448 in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project. Data analysis was performed using the TRGAted application with optimal cutoff.
Western blot analysis
Cells were lysed on ice with CelLytic MT reagent (Sigma) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Primary antibodies: TSC1 (#6935), TSC2 (#4308), phospho-S6 (#4858), S6 (#2217), p21 (#2947), Lamin B1 (#12586), LC3 A/B (#12741), phospho-ATG14-S29 (#92340), ATG14 (#96752), phospho-CREB-S133 (#9198), CREB (#9197), phospho-CHK1-S345 (#2348), phospho-WEE1-S642 (#4910), WEE1(#13084), PLK1 (#4513), γH2A.X (#9718), phospho-S6K-S371 (#9208), S6K (#2708), phospho-4EBP1-S65 (#9451), 4EBP1 (#9644), phospho-AKT-S473 (#4060), AKT (#4691), p53 (#2527), phospho-CDC2-T15 (#9111), CDC2 (#9116), and phospho-ATR-S428 (#2853) from Cell signaling (all used at a 1: 1000 dilution); β-tubulin (#10094-1-ap, 1: 4000), β-actin (#20536-1-ap, 1: 4000), and GAPDH (#10494-1-ap, 1: 10000) from ProteinTech; ATR (#A300-137A-T, 1: 1000) from Bethyl Lab, and CHK1 (#sc-8408, 1:1000) and Cyclin B1(#sc-245, 1: 1000) from Santa Cruz.
Flow cytometry analysis
For cell cycle distribution, cells were resuspended in PBS, fixed with ice-cold ethanol, and treated with RNase and propidium iodide, and analyzed on a BD FACS LSRII flow cytometer (BD Bioscience). Quantification of SABG enzymatic activity followed a previously described protocol. Briefly, cells were treated with bafilomycin A1 (100 nM) for one hour and stained with C12-FDG (33 μM) for two hours at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator before analysis. Data were analyzed using FlowJo software (v10.8.1) (Tree Star).
Autophagy reporter assay
pQCXI Puro DsRed-LC3-GFP (Addgene #31182) reporter was introduced in MIA PaCa-2 cells by retroviral infection. Cells expressing the reporter were seeded in 4-well-chambered coverslip (ibidi #80426) and treated with the indicated drugs for nine days. Images were acquired using an FV3000 confocal microscope. For each condition, LC3 puncta in at least 50 cells were counted.
Multicolor competition assay
MIA PaCa-2 wild type (WT) and TSC1/TSC2 knockout (KO) cells were transduced with retrovirus expressing RFP (pQCXIP-turboRFP, Addgene #73016) or EGFP (pQCXIP-EGFP-F, Addgene #73014). MIA PaCa-2 WT-RFP and TSC1/TSC2 KO-GFP cells were mixed 1:1. One day after seeding (d0) and 3, 6, and 9 days after chemotherapy, cells were imaged on a Leica DMi8 fluorescence microscope with a 10X objective using LAS X (v3.7.4) software. RFP and GFP positive cells were counted and the relative cell fitness was calculated from the ratio of RFP/GFP positive cells normalized to the d0 value.
Small-molecule chemical library screen
Approximately 200 chemical inhibitors covering major cell signaling and survival pathways were dissolved in DMSO or PBS. Inhibitors were typically tested at a 1:3 dilution from 10 µM to 100 nM, although some inhibitors were tested at concentrations as low as 30 nM or as high as 100 µM. Parental cells (single-agent) and persisters (triple-agent) were treated with individual inhibitors for nine days, and their response at each concentration was recorded. Cell survival was monitored daily. Any concentrations leading to significant changes in viability of either parental cells or persisters were recorded and the lowest concentration were reported in Fig. 5 and Supplementary Data 6. If both parental cells and persisters were killed, the experiment would be repeated using lower concentrations. For inhibitors reported in other studies, we consulted the original publications for the typical concentration ranges and revised our design accordingly.
Statistical analysis
Two-tailed Student’s t test was used to analyze the MCA data. Cell death rates among different treatment groups were analyzed using ANOVA with Tukey’s test. Results were presented as mean ± SEM. Animal survival was compared by Kaplan-Meier analysis with the log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test. For the gene ranking from CRISPR screen, two-sided p-values were computed by a permutation test in the MAGeCK software, and FDR correction of the p-value was performed by the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) procedure. For the comparison of transcriptome pattern and differential gene expression analysis, two-sided p-value were computed by the Wald test in the sleuth software and were adjusted by the BH procedure. One-sided Fisher’s exact test was performed in Enrichr for the GO term enrichment analysis of enriched/depleted genes. Microsoft Excel 2015 and GraphPad Prism v8.4.2 were used for statistics.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Supplementary information
Source data
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Supplementary information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41467-022-34890-6.
Author contributions
Y.Liu performed in vitro studies and chemical screens, and analyzed the public data sets. N.G.A. carried out CRISPR screens and in vivo studies. D.K.S. analyzed the CRISPR screen and RNA-seq data. Y.Li conceived and supervised the project. Y.Liu, N.G.A, and Y. Li wrote the manuscript.
Peer review
Peer review information
Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.
Data availability
Sequencing data generated in this study have been deposited in GEO with accession number GSE162065 for the CRISPR screens and GSE189764 for the RNA-seq experiment. The publicly available residual tumor data used in this study are available in the GEO database under accession codes: GSE87455, GSE165252, GSE15781, GSE40442. The RPPA data in TCGA project used for survival analysis (TRGAted application) were from the TCPA portal developed by MD Anderson Cancer Center. The remaining data are available within the article, supplementary information or source data file. All source data are included within the paper. Source data are provided with this paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PMID 29459677 — A CRISPR-based screen for Hedgehog signaling provides insights into ciliary function and ciliopathies.
Nature genetics (2018) · https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29459677/

A CRISPR-based screen for Hedgehog signaling provides insights into ciliary function and ciliopathies
The primary cilium organizes Hedgehog signaling and shapes embryonic development, and its dysregulation is the unifying cause of ciliopathies. We conducted a functional genomic screen for Hedgehog signaling by engineering antibiotic-based selection of Hedgehog-responsive cells and applying genome-wide CRISPR-mediated gene disruption. The screen robustly identifies factors required for ciliary signaling with few false positives or false negatives. Characterization of hit genes uncovers novel components of several ciliary structures, including a protein complex containing δ- and ε-tubulin that is required for centriole maintenance. The screen also provides an unbiased tool for classifying ciliopathies and reveals that many congenital heart disorders are caused by loss of ciliary signaling. Collectively, our study enables a systematic analysis of ciliary function and of ciliopathies and also defines a versatile platform for dissecting signaling pathways through CRISPR-based screening.
Introduction
The primary cilium is a surface-exposed microtubule-based compartment that serves as an organizing center for diverse signaling pathways. Mutations affecting cilia cause ciliopathies, a group of developmental disorders that includes Joubert Syndrome, Meckel Syndrome (MKS), Nephronophthisis (NPHP), and Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BBS). The defining symptoms of ciliopathies include skeletal malformations, mental retardation, sensory defects, obesity, and kidney cysts and are thought to arise from misregulation of ciliary signaling pathways. Advances in human genetics have led to the identification of over 90 ciliopathy genes. However, the molecular basis for many ciliopathy cases remains undiagnosed, and critical aspects of cilium assembly and function remain poorly understood.
A leading paradigm for ciliary signaling is the vertebrate Hedgehog (Hh) pathway, which plays key roles in embryonic development and in cancers such as medulloblastoma and basal cell carcinoma. Primary cilia are required for Hh signaling output, and all core components of the Hh signaling machinery – from the receptor PTCH1 to the GLI transcriptional effectors – dynamically localize to cilia during signal transduction.
Efforts to systematically identify genes needed for cilium assembly or Hh signaling have been reported, but these studies relied on arrayed siRNA libraries and exhibit the high rates of false positives and false negatives characteristic of such screens. Recently, genome-wide screening using CRISPR/Cas9 for gene disruption has emerged as a powerful tool for functional genomics. However, the pooled screening format used in these studies requires a means to select for/against or otherwise isolate cells exhibiting the desired phenotype, a requirement that has limited the scope of biological applications amenable to this approach. Indeed, most studies to date have searched for genes that either intrinsically affect cell growth or that affect sensitivity to applied perturbations.
Here, we engineered a Hh pathway-sensitive reporter to enable an antibiotic-based selection platform. Combining this reporter with a single guide RNA (sgRNA) lentiviral library targeting the mouse genome, we conducted a CRISPR-based screen that systematically identified ciliary components, Hh signaling machinery, and ciliopathy genes with few false positives or false negatives. We further show that previously uncharacterized hits encode new components of cilia and centrioles and also include novel ciliopathy genes.
Results
Development of a Hh pathway reporter for pooled screening
Pooled functional screening requires the ability to enrich or deplete mutants that exhibit a desired phenotype. Because ciliary signaling is not intrinsically linked to such a selectable phenotype, we engineered a reporter that converts Hh signaling into antibiotic resistance (Fig. 1A–B). This transcriptional reporter was introduced into mouse NIH-3T3 fibroblasts, a widely used cell line for Hh signaling and cilium biology, and these cells were then modified to express Cas9-BFP (3T3-[Shh-BlastR;Cas9] cells).
To validate our reporter cell line, we virally introduced sgRNAs targeting regulators of the Hh pathway (Supplementary Table 1). The transmembrane receptor SMO and intraflagellar transport (IFT) complex subunit IFT88 are required for Hh signaling, while SUFU and GLI3 restrain Hh pathway activity (Fig. 1c, left). As expected, sgRNAs targeting Smo or Ift88 severely reduced Sonic Hedgehog N-terminal domain (ShhN)-induced blasticidin resistance, while deleting Gli3 potentiated blasticidin resistance and targeting Sufu led to ligand-independent blasticidin resistance (Fig. 1c, right). These effects on blasticidin resistance were paralleled by concordant changes in endogenous pathway outputs, including GLI1 expression and changes in GLI3 processing (Supplementary Fig. 1a). Additionally, Western blotting confirmed loss of target protein expression for Gli3, Ift88, and Sufu sgRNAs (Supplementary Fig. 1a,b).
We next tested the suitability of our reporter cells for pooled screening, which involves quantifying sgRNAs in blasticidin-selected and unselected cell pools to identify sgRNAs that confer a selective advantage or disadvantage (Fig. 1d). We mimicked screening conditions by mixing GFP-marked cells expressing a Smo sgRNA with mCherry-marked cells expressing a portion of our genome-wide sgRNA library. Flow cytometry revealed that the fraction of Smo sgRNA-transduced cells decreased by >12-fold and by >50-fold after one and two rounds of signaling and selection, respectively, thus indicating that our strategy is suitable for pooled screening (Fig. 1e,f).
Genome-wide screening
We conducted our genome-wide screen using a newly developed mouse sgRNA library. Key features of this library are the use of 10 sgRNAs per gene and the inclusion of >10,000 negative control sgRNAs that are either non-targeting or that target “safe” sites with no predicted functional role (Supplementary Fig. 2a). We lentivirally transduced 3T3-[Shh-BlastR;Cas9] cells with this library at low multiplicity of infection and maintained sufficient cell numbers to ensure ~1000X coverage of the library. Cells were next exposed to ShhN for 24 h to fully stimulate Hh signaling, split into separate blastidicin-selected and unselected pools, and then subjected to a second cycle of signaling and selection before sgRNA quantification by deep sequencing (Fig. 1d). Genes affecting ciliary signaling were identified by comparing sgRNAs in the blastidicin-selected versus unselected cell pools, while genes affecting proliferation were identified by comparing the plasmid sgRNA library to the sgRNA population after 15 days growth in the absence of blasticidin. For statistical analysis, a maximum likelihood method termed casTLE was used to determine a P value for each gene from the changes in sgRNA abundance. In addition, the casTLE method estimates the apparent strength of the phenotype (effect size) caused by knockout of a given gene.
Assessment of screen performance
We first assessed our ability to detect genes affecting growth. This readout is independent of our reporter-based selection strategy and enables comparisons to other proliferation-based screens. Using reference positive and negative essential gene sets, we found that our screen identified >90% of essential genes with a 5% false discovery rate (FDR) (Supplementary Fig. 2b and Supplementary Tables 2–3). This performance validates the design of our sgRNA library and is comparable to that seen with other recently described libraries.
We next evaluated the ability of our screen to identify genes known to participate in ciliary Hh signaling. Initial inspection of screen results for Smo, Ift88, Gli1, Gli3, and Sufu revealed several sgRNAs targeting each gene that were depleted or enriched as expected upon blasticidin selection (Fig. 2a). Virtually all known Hh signaling components were among the top hits, including positive regulators Smo, Grk2, Kif7, Prkar1a, Gli1, and Gli2 and negative regulators Ptch1, Adcy6, Gsk3b, Sufu, and Gli3 (Fig. 2b and Supplementary Table 4). Our screen also recovered hits that encompass nearly all functional and structural elements of cilia, highlighting the diverse features of cilia needed for signaling (Fig. 2c). For example, several hits encode components of the basal body that nucleates the cilium, the transition fibers that anchor the basal body to the cell surface, the transition zone that gates protein entry into the cilium, the motors that mediate intraciliary transport, and the IFT complexes that traffic ciliary cargos (Fig. 2c and Supplementary Table 4). We observed no apparent correlation between growth and signaling phenotypes, indicating that our antibiotic selection strategy is not biased by general effects on proliferation (Supplementary Fig. 2c).
In total, we obtained 472 hits at a 10% FDR and 969 hits at a 20% FDR, and 92% of these hits led to decreased rather than increased signaling (Fig. 2b). This asymmetry indicates that, under the saturating level of ShhN used here, many genes are required to sustain high-level signaling while fewer genes act to restrain pathway output. Gene ontology (GO) term analysis using DAVID revealed that the top 472 hit genes were enriched for expected functional categories (e.g. cilium morphogenesis, P = 9.6×10−61; Smoothened signaling pathway, P < 3.6×10−32) as well as some novel categories, indicating new avenues for investigation (Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). In some cases, corroborating reports support these new connections: mouse mutants for two hit genes that enable diphthamide modification exhibit Hh pathway-related phenotypes such as polydactyly, and DPH1 mutations likewise cause a syndrome with ciliopathy-like features.
We next sought to use reference sets of expected hit and non-hit genes to quantitatively assess screen performance. We curated a set of ciliogenesis reference genes to generate a list of 130 expected hits; for expected non-hits we used 1386 olfactory and vomeronasal receptor genes (Supplementary Table 3). We then calculated precision-recall and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves (Fig. 3a) from the P values generated by casTLE. Both performance metrics showed a high area under the curve (0.802 for precision-recall, 0.892 for ROC), demonstrating that our screen detects hits with high sensitivity and precision (Fig. 3a).
As a second means of evaluation, we compared our ability to detect expected hit genes to that of three related screens. These studies used arrayed siRNA-based screening to study either Hh signaling using a luciferase reporter or ciliogenesis using microscopy-based measures of ciliary markers. While there are notable differences among the screens (e.g. Roosing et al. incorporated gene expression data to score hits), they each defined a number of hit genes similar to our screen. Overall, we detected the vast majority of expected hits across functional categories ranging from Hh pathway components to ciliopathy genes. Furthermore, even though our screen was focused on Hh signaling, we detected a greater fraction of ciliary hits than the ciliogenesis screens across categories including IFT subunits, ciliary motors, and nearly all classes of ciliopathy genes (Fig. 3b,c, Supplementary Fig. 3a and Supplementary Table 4). Indeed, among the 88 genes encompassed by the categories shown in Fig. 3b (except for NPHP-specific genes; see below), we detect 65 as hits, indicating that our screen is approaching saturation (Fig. 3c). Interestingly, few hits were found for genes mutated exclusively in NPHP, raising the possibility that NPHP pathophysiology is distinct from that of other ciliopathies (see Supplementary Note).
As a final assessment of our screening platform, we evaluated reproducibility across replicate screens. We observed high concordance among hits for the 95 genes measured in two different batches of the screen, with 50 of 54 screen hits also scoring as hits in the second batch (Supplementary Fig. 3b). Similarly, strong overlap in hits was found for 263 genes that were screened using two similar but distinct activators of Hh signaling: PTCH1 ligand (ShhN) and SMO agonist (SAG) (Supplementary Fig. 3c). This reproducibility makes it possible to pinpoint genes acting at specific steps in Hh signal transduction. For example, Gas1 was a hit in the ShhN screen but not in the SAG screen, a result in agreement with GAS1’s known function as a Shh co-receptor.
Identification of new ciliary components
To further establish the value of our screen, we next set out to characterize six previously unstudied hit genes. We first focused on Fam92a and Ttc23 because their gene products contain domains associated with membrane trafficking. For Fam92a, we generated mutant cell pools using individually cloned sgRNAs and confirmed by sequencing that most cells harbored likely null alleles. Indeed, a high rate of mutagenesis was observed for all genes characterized here and below (Supplementary Fig. 4a). Fam92a disruption caused a strong defect in inducible blasticidin resistance (Supplementary Fig. 4b). This defect was also seen for induction of luciferase from a GLI binding site reporter and could be rescued by sgRNA-resistant Fam92a (Fig. 4a), indicating that the phenotype is specific and independent of the blasticidin-based readout. Notably, ciliogenesis was severely reduced in Fam92a knockout cell pools (Fig. 4b). To gain further insight into Fam92a function, we identified FAM92A-associated proteins from cells expressing FAM92A-LAP (S-tag-HRV3C-GFP localization and affinity purification tag). FAM92-LAP purification specifically recovered CBY1 and DZIP1L, which are components of the transition zone (Fig. 4c and Supplementary Table 6). Consistent with this finding, we observed FAM92A localization at the transition zone using a validated antibody (Supplementary Fig. 4c,d) and the FAM92A-LAP cell line (Fig. 4d). While this work was in progress, another group independently established FAM92A as a transition zone protein that interacts with CBY1 and promotes ciliogenesis.
To characterize the TPR domain-containing protein TTC23, we identified TTC23-interacting proteins by affinity purification and mass spectrometry. Notably, the most prominent TTC23-associated proteins were IQCE and EFCAB7, which localize to a proximal region of the cilium known as the Ellis-van Creveld (EvC) zone (Fig. 4e and Supplementary Table 6). While the four known EvC zone proteins are dispensable for cilium assembly, they are all important for Hh signaling. Furthermore, mutations that affect EvC zone proteins EVC and EVC2 cause the ciliopathy Ellis-van Creveld syndrome. Consistent with TTC23 being a new EvC zone component, TTC23-LAP co-localized with EVC and IQCE at the EvC zone (Fig. 4f and Supplementary Fig. 4e). Although Ttc23 knockout had no effect on cilium assembly, mutant cells exhibited decreased blasticidin resistance and reduced localization of IQCE and EVC to the EvC zone (Fig. 4g and Supplementary Fig. 4b,f–h). Conversely, Iqce RNAi led to decreased localization of TTC23-LAP to the EvC zone (Fig. 4h). Together these results establish TTC23 as a novel EvC zone component that participates in Hh signaling.
Identification of novel disease genes
Because the vast majority of ciliopathy genes were hits in the screen, we asked whether uncharacterized hit genes may be mutated in ciliopathies of previously unknown etiology. We first examined Txndc15, which encodes a thioredoxin domain-containing transmembrane protein. A previous analysis of MKS patients identified a family with a TXNDC15 mutation; however, a coincident EXOC4 variant was favored as the causative mutation. We analyzed Txndc15 knockout cells using the luciferase reporter assay, finding a clear defect in Hh signaling. Furthermore, wildtype Txndc15 rescued this defect, whereas the mutant allele found in MKS patients behaved like a null allele (Fig. 5a). We also found that cilia in Txndc15 knockout cells exhibited increased variability in length and decreased levels of the ciliary GTPase ARL13B (Fig. 5b and Supplementary Fig. 5a,b). Thus, TXNDC15 likely represents a novel MKS gene. Consistent with our findings, a very recent follow-up study has identified additional MKS families with TXNDC15 mutations and characterized ciliary defects resulting from TXNDC15 disruption.
Our observation of Armc9 as a screen hit raises the possibility that it is also a ciliopathy gene. Recently, Kar et al. reported that individuals with a homozygous mutation in ARMC9 present with mental retardation, polydactyly, and ptosis, but a diagnosis of Bardet-Biedl syndrome was disfavored. We found that cilia from Armc9 mutant cells were short and exhibited reduced levels of acetylated and polyglutamylated tubulin (Fig. 5c and Supplementary Fig. 5c). Furthermore, ARMC9-3xFLAG localized to the proximal region of cilia when stably expressed in IMCD3 or NIH-3T3 cells (Fig. 5d,e and Supplementary Fig. 5d). Notably, stimulation of Hh signaling in IMCD3 cells led to redistribution of ARMC9 towards the ciliary tip within 6 hr before a gradual return to its original proximal location, suggesting that ARMC9 might become ectocytosed from the cilium tip at later time points (Fig. 5d,e). This change in localization was due to Hh signaling, as it was blocked by SMO inhibitor vismodegib (Supplementary Fig. 5e). Furthermore, Armc9 mutant NIH-3T3 cells exhibited reduced ciliary accumulation of GLI2 and GLI3 (but not SMO) upon pathway activation, suggesting that ARMC9 participates in the trafficking and/or retention of GLI proteins at the ciliary tip (Fig. 5f and Supplementary Fig. 5f–h). Collectively, these findings demonstrate that ARMC9 is a ciliary signaling factor and suggest that ARMC9 is a novel ciliopathy gene. Indeed, a recent report confirms that ARMC9 is mutated in Joubert Syndrome and finds that loss of the zebrafish ortholog disrupts cilium assembly and function. This study further reports that ARMC9 localizes to centrioles in RPE cells, whereas we find ARMC9-FLAG localizes to cilia (Fig. 5d,e and Supplementary Fig. 5d) and is present in the ciliary proteome (D. Mick and M. Nachury, personal communication). While the basis for these differing observations warrants further investigation, together these data reveal an important role for ARMC9 in ciliary signaling.
Our evidence that ARMC9- (and DPH1-) based syndromes likely represent unrecognized ciliopathies led us to ask whether our screen could help classify other genetic disorders as ciliopathies. Consistent with this possibility, CWC27, which encodes a peptidyl-prolyl isomerase, and INTS1 and INTS8, which encode subunits of the Integrator, are orthologues of screen hits for which patient mutations have recently been described. Some canonical ciliopathy symptoms are present in these patients, and thus these disorders may stem from altered ciliary signaling (see Supplementary Note).
These cases of individual disorders that can now be classified as likely ciliopathies led us to ask whether systematic efforts to map disease genes might reveal broader commonalities with our screen hits. Strikingly, we found that human orthologues of screen hits Ankrd11, Cdk13, Chd4, Foxp1, Kmt2d, and Prkd1 were all identified in an exome sequencing study of patients with congenital heart defects (CHD). The significant overlap in these two unbiased datasets (P = 6.11 × 10−4) indicates that defective ciliary signaling may be a prevalent cause of CHDs. Moreover, mutations in these genes appear to cause bona fide ciliopathies, as patients also exhibit ciliopathy symptoms including craniofacial abnormalities and developmental delay (ANKRD11, CDK13, CHD4, FOXP1, KMT2D, PRKD1), dysgenesis of the corpus callosum (CDK13), polydactyly (CHD4), obesity (ANKRD11), and craniofacial malformations (ANKRD11 and KMT2D) (Fig. 5g).
A new protein complex for centriole stability
Because our screen hits encode centriolar proteins CEP19, CEP44, CEP120, and CEP295, we considered whether other hits might also have centriolar functions. Indeed, the protein encoded by uncharacterized hit 1600002H07Rik (human C16orf59) localized to centrioles in IMCD3 cells (Fig. 6a). We performed affinity purifications and found that 1600002H07Rik-LAP co-purified with the uncharacterized protein 4930427A07Rik (human C14orf80) and the distant α/β-tubulin relatives ε-tubulin (TUBE1) and δ-tubulin (TUBD1) (Fig. 6b). All four of the genes encoding these proteins are hits in our screen, and ε-tubulin and δ-tubulin have previously been linked to centriole assembly and maintenance. We therefore propose to name 4930427A07Rik/C14orf80 and 1600002H07Rik/C16orf59 as Tedc1 and Tedc2, respectively, for their association with a tubulins epsilon and delta complex.
Our mass spectrometry analysis of TEDC2-associated proteins revealed approximately stoichiometric amounts of TEDC1, TEDC2, ε-tubulin, and δ-tubulin, as seen by comparison of the normalized spectral abundance factors (Fig. 6b and Supplementary Table 6). We also recovered lower amounts of α/β-tubulin and CENPJ, a centriolar regulator of microtubule dynamics. We confirmed co-purification of TUBD1 and TUBE1 with TEDC2 by Western blot, readily detecting these proteins in our TEDC2-LAP purification but not in a control purification (Supplementary Fig. 6a). The interaction between TEDC1 and TEDC2 could also be detected by co-transfection and co-immunoprecipitation, and moreover we found that TEDC1 and TEDC2 mutually stabilize each other’s expression (Fig. 6c and Supplementary Fig. 6b). In further support of our data, two large-scale proteomic datasets have also identified interactions among TED complex proteins.
To functionally characterize Tedc1 and Tedc2, we examined mutant cell pools and found that they were almost completely devoid of centrioles, as assessed by staining with antibodies to centrin, ninein, polyglutamylated tubulin or γ-tubulin (Fig. 7a,c,d). Mutant cells also lacked cilia (Fig. 7a) and had strong defects in Hh signaling (Supplementary Fig. 6c,d). Notably, centrioles and cilia were restored in Tedc1 mutant cells following introduction of sgRNA-resistant TEDC1-Flag (Supplementary Fig. 6e,f), which also localized to centrioles (Supplementary Fig. 6g).
We noted that Tedc1 and Tedc2 mutants exhibited a mild growth defect (Supplementary Table 3), which is consistent with recent evidence that NIH-3T3 cells lacking centrioles proliferate at a reduced rate. By contrast, in other cell types, a p53-dependent arrest prevents growth in the absence of centrioles. These observations prompted us to investigate whether the varying effects of Tedc1 or Tedc2 on proliferation across different cell types could enable predictive identification of genes with similar function. We therefore examined a collection of CRISPR-based growth screens conducted in 33 different human cell lines and used hierarchical clustering to group genes based on their cell type-specific growth phenotypes. Strikingly, this unbiased approach placed TEDC1, TEDC2, and TUBE1 in a single cluster (Fig. 7b and Supplementary Table 7), suggesting that they share a highly similar function. While TUBD1 was not found in this cluster, this result is likely due to ineffective targeting of TUBD1 by the sgRNA library used. Indeed, while other CRISPR screens have reported pronounced growth defects for TUBD1 mutants, this study did not..
To better understand the basis for centriole loss in Tedc1 and Tedc2 mutants, we examined cells at different stages of the cell cycle. Surprisingly, while mutant cells typically had zero or one centriole in interphase, nearly all mitotic cells had excess centrioles (more than four), suggestive of de novo centriole formation before mitotic entry (Fig. 7c,d and Supplementary Fig. 6h). By contrast, cells exiting mitosis showed significantly fewer centrioles than control cells (Fig. 7d). Taken together, these observations suggest that Tedc1 and Tedc2 are dispensable for centriole biogenesis but required for centriole stability, with newly generated centrioles rapidly lost as cells exit mitosis. In further support of a shared function for TED complex components, TUBE1- and TUBD1-deficient human cells were recently shown to have a similar phenotype.
Discussion
Here we present a functional screening platform that pairs a pathway-specific selectable reporter with genome-wide CRISPR-based gene disruption. Applying these technologies to cilium-dependent Hh signaling, we obtain a comprehensive portrait of cilium biology that identifies hit genes with high sensitivity and specificity. Several factors likely contributed to the quality of our screen, including the pooled screening format, the use of CRISPR for gene disruption, and a newly designed sgRNA library (see Supplementary Note). Furthermore, our use of a selectable pathway reporter makes this technology applicable to virtually any process with a well-defined transcriptional response.
Our pooled CRISPR-based screening approach enabled us to generate a rich dataset that will be a valuable resource for dissecting ciliary signaling, defining ciliopathy genes, and discovering potential therapeutic targets in Hh-driven cancers. While siRNA-based screens have contributed to our understanding of cilia and Hh signaling, these datasets suffer from false positives or false negatives that limit their utility. Roosing et al. improved their ciliogenesis screen results by using reference gene sets to help classify hits and by integrating gene expression datasets with their microscopy-based screen data. Our approach achieved high performance without dependence on other data sources, which may not always be available, or on a priori definition of hits, which could bias discovery of new hit classes. Our screens are also highly reproducible, thereby enabling comparative screening approaches that will be instrumental in uncovering novel factors acting at specific steps in Hh signaling. Modifications to our screening strategy, such as performing screens in other cell lines or in unstimulated (or weakly stimulated) cells, may better replicate certain in vivo signaling modalities and may have improved sensitivity for identifying negative regulators of Hh signaling.
The value of our screen is demonstrated by the discovery of new genes that participate in ciliary signaling and new candidate ciliopathy genes. While the precise roles of FAM92A at the transition zone and TTC23 at the EvC zone will require further study, our screen demonstrates that new components remain to be identified even for well-studied ciliary structures. Similarly, our analyses of TXNDC15, ARMC9, CWC27, DPH1, INTS6, INTS10, ANKRD11, CDK13, CHD4, FOXP1, PRKD1, and KTM2D illustrate that screen hits can help to identify a ciliopathy-causing gene from a short list of variants, as is frequently the case in studies involving small pedigrees, and to classify new genetic syndromes as disorders of ciliary signaling. With the exception of TXNDC15, all of the aforementioned genes had been previously linked to disease without a potential role for cilia described (e.g. KMT2D and Kabuki Syndrome, OMIM 147920; ANKRD11 and KBG Syndrome, OMIM 148050; DPH1 and Loucks-Innes Syndrome, OMIM 616901). Among the syndromes caused by mutations in these genes, it is striking that the most prevalent feature is CHD. Our screen thus provides unbiased evidence that several CHD cases are ciliopathies, building upon similar connections observed in mice and motivating future investigations by human geneticists and developmental biologists.
By contrast, it is noteworthy that few of the ciliopathy genes primarily linked to kidney pathology were found as screen hits, suggesting that these renal diseases are mechanistically distinct (see Supplementary Note). By capturing an unbiased picture of cilium-based signaling, our screen refines the classification of ciliopathies. More broadly, as genome sequencing reveals disease-associated variants at ever-growing rates, genome-wide functional studies such as that presented here will become a powerful resource to distinguish disease-causing mutations from innocuous variants and to gain insight into underlying disease mechanisms.
Our screen identifies hit genes with diverse roles in cilium function, Hh signaling, and centriole biology. For hits Tedc1, Tedc2, Tubd1, and Tube1, we found that these genes act in concert to ensure centriole stability, as evidenced by the association of their gene products in a stoichiometric complex. This finding reveals a new direct link between ε- and δ-tubulin and raises the possibility that they may form a heterodimer analogous to α/β-tubulin. In addition to the physical association of TED complex components, deficiency for TED complex-encoding genes produces a remarkably similar pattern of growth phenotypes across cell lines. Moreover, we find that these genes exhibit a similar phylogenetic distribution (see Supplementary Table 8, Supplementary Fig. 7, and Supplementary Note). Together, these observations provide further evidence for a shared function and illustrate the precise functional predictions made possible by CRISPR-based growth profiling.
Studies in Paramecium, Tetrahymena, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, and, most recently, human cells have shown that disrupting δ- or ε-tubulin leads to loss of the C and/or B tubules of the centriolar triplet microtubules. We propose that the centrioles formed in Tedc1/2-deficient cells similarly lack triplet microtubules, causing them to degenerate during mitotic exit at the time when pericentriolar material (PCM) is stripped from the centrosome. Since removal of the PCM causes centriolar instability in fly spermatocytes, post-mitotic PCM removal may also trigger centriole loss in Tedc1/2 mutants. CENPJ may act together with the TED complex to ensure centriole stability, as CENPJ was found in our TEDC2 purifications and a mutation in Cenpj disrupts triplet microtubules in Drosophila spermatocytes. As CENPJ is a microcephaly gene, TED complex components are potential candidate genes for this neurodevelopmental disorder.
In summary, we have developed a functional screening platform that provides a resource for investigating long-standing questions in Hh signaling and primary cilia biology. By further applying these tools, it may now be possible to systematically define vulnerabilities in Hh pathway-driven cancers, to identify modifiers of Hh pathway-inhibiting chemotherapeutics, and to search for suppressors of ciliopathies that may inform treatment. Integrating this functional genomic approach with complementary insights from proteomics and human genetics promises a rich toolkit for understanding ciliary signaling in health and disease.
Online Methods
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to David Breslow (david.breslow@yale.edu).
EXPERIMENTAL MODELS AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Cell lines and cell culture
NIH-3T3 and HEK293T cells were grown in high glucose, pyruvate-supplemented DMEM (Gibco) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM glutamine, 10 U/ml penicillin and 10 μg/ml streptomycin (Gemini Bio-Products). NIH-3T3 FlpIn cells (gift from R. Rohatgi) were grown in the same medium supplemented with non-essential amino acids (Gibco). Light-II NIH-3T3 cells were grown in the same medium except with 10% bovine calf serum (ATCC), and IMCD3 cells were grown in DMEM/F12 medium (Gibco) with FBS, glutamine, penicillin and streptomycin additives. Serum starvation was done using medium with 0.5% FBS for NIH-3T3 cells, 0.5% calf serum for Light-II NIH-3T3 cells, and 0.2% FBS for IMCD3 cells. IMCD3 FlpIn cells were provided by Peter Jackson. NIH-3T3 cells were obtained from ATCC. HEK239T-EcR-ShhN cells were provided by Philip Beachy. Cells were confirmed to be mycoplasma free with the MycoAlert system (Lonza).
METHOD DETAILS
DNA cloning
Individual sgRNAs were cloned by ligating annealed oligonucleotides into pMCB306 or pMCB320 digested with BstXI and Bpu1102I (Fermentas FastDigest enzymes, Thermo Fisher). Ligated products were transformed into Mach1-T1 competent cells (Thermo Fisher), and recovered plasmids were verified by sequencing.
Cilia-focused sgRNA libraries were cloned from oligonucleotide pools (Agilent) as described. Briefly, oligonucleotides were amplified using primer sequences common to each sub-library, digested with BstXI and Bpu1102I, ligated into pMCB320, and transformed into Endura competent cells (Lucigen). DNA was isolated using a Plasmid Plus Giga kit (Qiagen).
Individual cDNAs were amplified from mouse cDNA or commercially available sources (Dharmacon) and cloned into Gateway Entry vectors via BP clonase-mediated recombination (Thermo Fisher) or using isothermal assembly. Mutations to introduce resistance to sgRNA-directed cleavage were introduced by isothermal assembly. Plasmids for expression of tagged genes of interest were generated from Entry vectors by LR clonase-mediated recombination (Thermo Fisher) into Destination vectors encoding C-terminal LAP, 3xFLAG, or 6xMyc tags.
Plasmid pHR-Pgk-Cas9-BFP was cloned by digestion of pHR-SFFV-Cas9-BFP (M. Bassik) and replacement of the SFFV promoter with the Pgk promoter amplified from pEFB/FRT-pCrys-APGpr161NG3-NsiI-pPgk-BirA-ER. Plasmid pGL-8xGli-Bsd-T2A-GFP-Hyg was generated in the pGL4.29-[luc2P/CRE/Hygro] vector (Promega) by replacement of the CRE response element with 8xGli binding sites amplified from pGL3-8xGli-Luc (P. Beachy) and of Luc2P with Bsd-T2A-GFP amplified from pEF5B-FRT-DEST-LAP.
Virus production and cell transduction
VSVG-pseudotyped lentiviral particles were produced by co-transfection of HEK293T cells with a lentiviral vector and appropriate packaging plasmids (pMD2.G, pRSV-Rev, pMDLg/RRE for sgRNAs expressed in pMCB320 or pMCB306; pCMV-ΔR-8.91 and pCMV-VSVG for Pgk-Cas9-BFP). Following transfection using polyethyleneimine (linear, MW~25000, Polysciences), virus-containing supernatant was collected 24 h later and filtered through a 0.45 μm cellulose acetate filter. For sgRNA libraries, a second harvest of viral medium was performed 24 h after the initial harvest. For Cas9-containing virus, lentiviral particles were concentrated 20-fold using Lenti-X Concentrator (Clontech).
Cells were transduced by addition of viral supernatants diluted to an appropriate titer in growth medium containing 4 μg/ml polybrene (Sigma Aldrich). Following 24 h incubation at 37°C, virus-containing medium was removed; after an additional 24 h, cells were passaged and, where appropriate, selection for transduced cells was commenced by addition of 2.0 μg/ml puromycin (Invivogen). Multiplicity of infection was determined by flow cytometry.
ShhN production and titering
ShhN-containing conditioned medium was produced in HEK239T-EcR-ShhN cells. Cells were grown to 80% confluence, medium changed to DMEM with 2% FBS, followed by collection of conditioned medium after 48 h and filtration through a 0.22 μm filter (EMD Millipore). The titer of ShhN was determined using NIH-3T3 Light-II reporter cells (see Luciferase reporter assays), and a concentration approximately two-fold greater than the minimum dilution needed for full induction was used for further experiments (typically 1:12.5).
Flow cytometry and fluorescence-activated cell sorting
Flow cytometry analyses were conducted using a FACSScan (Becton Dickinson) outfitted with lasers provided by Cytek Biosciences. FACS was performed using FACSAria II cell sorters (Becton Dickinson). Flow cytometry and FACS data were analyzed using Flowjo (Treestar).
Generation of stable cell lines
The 3T3-[Shh-BlastR;Cas9] reporter cell line was generated using Lipofectamine 2000 (Thermo Fisher) to transfect NIH-3T3 cells with pGL-8xGli-Bsd-T2A-GFP-Hyg. Following selection for hygromycin-resistant cells, clonal isolates were obtained by limiting dilution and tested for SAG-induced blastidicin resistance. Pgk-Cas9-BFP was introduced lentivirally, followed by three rounds of FACS sorting for high-level BFP expression.
Stable cell lines for affinity purification and localization studies were generated using the FlpIn system (Life Technologies) with IMCD3 FlpIn or NIH-3T3 FlpIn cells. Plasmids encoding genes of interest in the pEF5B/FRT-DEST-LAP (or 3xFLAG) vector were transfected into FlpIn cells together with pOG44 Flp recombinase (Life Technologies) using X-tremegene 9 (Roche). Recombined cell pools were obtained following selection with blasticidin (Sigma Aldrich).
Rescue of Tedc1 mutant cells was performed by lentiviral transduction with a construct expressing sgRNA-resistant mouse TEDC1-3xFlag-T2A-GFP. This construct was expressed from the Pgk promoter, and cells were analyzed 7–14 days post-transduction.
Blasticidin reporter assays
3T3-[Shh-BlastR;Cas9] cells were seeded for signaling and grown to near confluence. Growth medium was replaced with serum starvation medium with or without pathway agonist (ShhN conditioned medium or 250 nM SAG, synthesized as described). After 24 h, cells were passaged at ~1:6 dilution into medium with 10% FBS, and 5 h later subjected to selection with blasticidin (blasticidin S hydrochloride, Sigma Aldrich) for 4 d. Relative viability was determined using the CellTiter-Blue assay (Promega) using a SpectraMax Paradigm (Molecular Devices) or Infinite M1000 (Tecan) plate reader.
Genome-wide screening
Due to the large number of cells required, we conducted the screen in four batches using subsets of the library containing ~45,000–70,000 sgRNAs (Supplementary Fig. 2a). For each batch, lentivirus was produced and titered as described above. 3T3-[Shh-BlastR;Cas9] cells were grown in 15 cm plates and transduced at a multiplicity of infection of ~0.3 in sufficient numbers such that there was a ~500:1 ratio of transduced cells to sgRNA library elements. Cells were selected with puromycin for 5 d, grown for 3 d without puromycin, and then plated for signaling, maintaining a ~1,000:1 ratio of cells to sgRNAs for these and all subsequent steps. After cells reached confluence, signaling was initiated by addition of serum starvation medium containing ShhN. After 24 h, cells were passaged, allowed to adhere, and then subjected to blasticidin selection for 4 d at 5 μg/ml, a concentration we found sufficient to achieve strong enrichment/depletion of hits without causing sgRNA library bottlenecks due to excess cell death. After passaging cells to blasticidin-free medium, a ‘T1’ sample was harvested (1000-fold more cells than sgRNAs) and remaining cells were passaged once more before seeding for a second round of signaling and selection. The final ‘T2’ cell sample was collected following 4 d blasticidin selection and one additional passage in the absence of blasticidin. Unselected control cells were also propagated through the entire experiment and harvested at equivalent timepoints.
Screens using the cilia/Hh pathway-focused library were conducted as above except that a variant blasticidin reporter cell line was used in which Cas9-BFP was expressed using the shortened EF1α promoter. Because some Cas9-negative cells accumulated during the experiment, the final blasticidin-selected and unselected cells were FACS-sorted for BFP expression.
To process cell samples for sgRNA sequencing, genomic DNA was isolated using QiaAmp DNA Blood Maxi or QiaAmp DNA mini kits (Qiagen). Genomic DNA was then amplified using Herculase II polymerase (Agilent) as described, first using outer primers to amplify the sgRNA cassette, then inner primers to amplify a portion of the initial PCR product while introducing sample-specific barcodes and adapters for Illumina sequencing (Supplementary Table 9). Gel-purified PCR products were quantified with a Qubit 2.0 fluorometer using the dsDNA HS kit (Thermo Fisher) and pooled for sequencing. Deep sequencing was performed on a NextSeq 500 sequencer with high-output v2 kits (Illumina) to obtain ~500-fold excess of reads to sgRNA library elements. Sequencing was performed using a custom primer to read the sgRNA protospacer (see Supplementary Table 9).
Cas9-induced mutation analysis by sequencing
Genomic DNA from sgRNA-transduced cell pools was extracted using the QIAamp DNA Mini kit (Qiagen) and amplified using primers flanking the sgRNA target site (see Supplementary Table 1). Gel-purified PCR products were subjected to Sanger sequencing, and resulting chromatograms were analyzed using TIDE (Tracking of Indels by Sequence Decomposition).
Luciferase reporter assays
Luciferase reporter assays were conducted using 3T3-[Shh-BlastR;Cas9] cells co-transfected with pGL3-8xGli-Firefly-luciferase and pGL3-SV40-Renilla-luciferase. One day after plating, cells were transfected using Mirus TransIT-2020 (Mirus Bio) with luciferase plasmids and either control GFP-encoding plasmid (pEF5B-FRT-GFP-FKBP) or a plasmid encoding a gene of interest. Nearly confluent cells were switched to serum starvation medium with or without pathway agonist 24 h later, and allowed to signal for 24–30 h. Alternatively, luciferase assays for titering ShhN-conditioned medium were performed with the NIH-3T3 Light-II cell line, which has stably integrated versions of GLI-driven firefly luciferase and constitutively expressed Renilla luciferase. After signaling, cells were lysed in lysis buffer (12.5 mM Tris pH 7.4, 4% glycerol, 0.5% Triton X-100, 0.5 mg/mL BSA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT) and a dual luciferase measurement performed using a Modulus microplate luminometer (Turner Biosystems).
Immunofluorescence and localization studies
IMCD3 FlpIn or 3T3-[Shh-BlastR;Cas9] cells were plated on acid-washed 13mm round #1.5 coverslips (additionally coated with poly-L-lysine for NIH-3T3 cells). After 24 h, cells were transfected as needed with siRNAs (Supplementary Table 9) using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Thermo Fisher) or with plasmids using Fugene 6 (Promega). Where indicated, cells were serum starved for 24 h and treated with ShhN or 1 μM vismodegib (Chemietek) before fixation using 4% paraformaldehyde, ice-cold methanol, or both in succession. For GLI2/GLI3/SMO trafficking assays, cells were serum-starved for 20 h, followed by 5–6 h incubation in the presence or absence of ShhN-conditioned medium. For analysis of TEDC2-LAP localization, cells were pre-extracted prior to methanol fixation via a one-minute exposure to PHEM buffer (60 mM PIPES, 25 mM HEPES, 4 mM MgSO4, 10 mM EGTA, pH 7.0) with 0.2% TritonX-100.
Fixed coverslips were blocked using PBS with 3% BSA and 5% normal donkey serum, permeabilized using PBS with 0.1% Triton X-100, and then incubated with appropriate primary and secondary antibodies (Supplementary Table 10). Coverslips were either stained with Hoechst DNA dye and mounted on slides using Fluoromount-G mounting medium (Electron Microscopy Sciences) or directly mounted using ProLong Gold antifade reagent with DAPI (Life Technologies).
Coverslips were imaged at 60x or 63x magnification using one of the following microscope systems: an Axio Imager.M1 (Carl Zeiss) equipped with SlideBook software, an LED light source (Intelligent Imaging Innovations) and a Prime 95b sCMOS camera (Photometrics); an Axio Imager.M1 (Carl Zeiss) equipped with SlideBook software, a Lambda XL light source (Sutter instruments) and CoolSNAP HQ CCD camera (Photometrics); an Axio Imager.M2 equipped with ZEN software, an X-Cite 120 LED light source (Excelitas) and an Axiocam 503 mono camera (Carl Zeiss); or a DeltaVision Elite imaging system equipped with SoftWoRx software, an LED light source, and sCMOS camera (Applied Precision). Z-stacks were acquired at 250–500 nm intervals and deconvolved as needed using Slidebook 6.0 or SoftWoRx softwares.
Co-transfection and co-immunoprecipitation
HEK293T cells were co-transfected with Tedc1, Tedc2 or TagRFP plasmids using Fugene 6, collected after 48 h, and lysed on ice in CoIP buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 1X DTT, 1X LPB) supplemented with protease inhibitors. Lysates were centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 20 min, and FLAG-tagged proteins were captured by incubation for 2 h with anti-FLAG M2 antibody (Sigma Aldrich) and Protein G Sepharose 4 Fast Flow (GE Healthcare). After four washes of resin with CoIP buffer, bound proteins were eluted by incubation at 95°C in lithium dodecyl sulfate-based gel loading buffer.
Western blotting
Lysates from 3T3-[Shh-BlastR;Cas9] cells were prepared in SDS sample buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 6.8, 8% v/v glycerol, 2% w/v SDS, 100 mM DTT, 0.1 mg/mL bromophenol blue), boiled and sonicated. Samples were loaded onto a 4–15% Criterion TGX Stainfree gel (Bio-Rad), and run for 25 min, 300V in Tris/Glycine/SDS buffer (Bio-Rad), before being transferred onto a PVDF membrane using a Transblot Turbo system (Bio-Rad). Membranes were blocked in 1:1 PBS:SeaBlock (Thermo Scientific) for 1 h at room temperature, and subsequently incubated with the indicated primary antibody for 16 h at 4 °C (Supplementary Table 10). After incubation with HRP-conjugated secondary antibody, blots were developed using Supersignal West Femto Maximum Sensitivity Substrate (Thermo Fisher) and imaged on a ChemiDoc MP (Bio-Rad). Membranes were stripped using Restore Western Blot stripping buffer (Thermo-Fisher) and re-probed as described.
For analysis of immunoprecipitations, Western blotting was performed as described above, except samples were separated in 4–12% Bis-Tris PAGE gels (Invitrogen) using MOPS running buffer, transferred to PVDF membranes using the Criterion Blotter system (Bio-Rad), developed using ECL or ECL 2 chemiluminescence detection kits (Pierce), and imaged on a Chemidoc Touch system (Bio-Rad).
Large-scale affinity purification and mass spectrometry
Affinity purifications were conducted as described. Briefly, ~500–1000 μl packed cell volume was lysed in LAP purification buffer containing 0.3% NP-40. Lysate was cleared sequentially at 16,000 × g and 100,000 × g before incubation with anti-GFP antibody coupled to Protein A resin. After protein capture and washes, bound LAP-tagged proteins were eluted by incubation with HRV3C protease. For mass spectrometry analysis ‘A’ (see Supplementary Table 6), eluted proteins were further purified by capture on S-Protein agarose followed by elution at 95°C in lithium dodecyl sulfate-based gel loading buffer.
For protein analysis by mass spectrometry, gel slices containing affinity-purified proteins were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by reduction with DTT (5 mM) and alkylation using propionamide (10 mM). Gel slices were further washed with an acetonitrile-ammonium bicarbonate buffer until all stain was removed. 120 ng of Trypsin/LysC (Promega) reconstituted in 0.1% ProteaseMAX (Promega) with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to each gel band; after 30 min., 20 μL of additional 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 0.1% ProteaseMAX was added. Digestion was then allowed to occur overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted from the gels in duplicate followed by drying using a SpeedVac concentrator. Peptide pools were then reconstituted and injected onto a C18 reversed phase analytical column, ~20 cm in length, pulled and packed in-house. The UPLC was a NanoAcquity or M-Class column (Waters), operated at 450 nL/min using a linear gradient from 4% mobile phase B to 45% B. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.2% formic acid, water; mobile phase B was 0.2% acetic acid, acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was an Orbitrap Elite or Fusion (Thermo Fisher) set to acquire in a data-dependent fashion selecting and fragmenting the 15 most intense precursor ions in the ion-trap, where the exclusion window was set at 45 seconds and multiple charge states of the same ion were allowed.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Analysis of CRISPR-based screens
CRISPR-based screens were analyzed as described, processing data from each screen batch separately. To determine sgRNA counts in each sample, raw sequencing reads were trimmed to the 3′-most 17 nt of each protospacer and aligned to expected sgRNA sequences. This alignment was carried out with the makeCounts script of the casTLE software package, which uses Bowtie to perform alignment with zero mismatches tolerated. The analyzeCounts script (v0.7 and v1.0) of casTLE was then used to identify genes exhibiting significant enrichment or depletion and to estimate the phenotypic effect size for each gene. This method uses an empirical Bayesian approach to score genes according to the log-likelihood ratio that a gene’s observed changes in sgRNA counts is drawn from a model of gene effect versus the distribution of negative control sgRNAs. An expected negative score distribution is obtained by random permutation of gene-targeting sgRNA fold-change values and used to determine a P value for each gene. Note that the use of 100,000 permutations leads to a minimum reported P value of 1 × 10−5 (200,000 permutations were used for comparative screening in Supplementary Fig. 3c, with minimum P value of 5 × 10−6). For each gene, the casTLE algorithm also estimates the magnitude of the phenotype resulting from complete gene inactivation. This value is output as the effect size and is accompanied by an estimated range of effect sizes compatible with each gene’s sgRNA data.
Genes targeted by our sgRNA library that lacked an NCBI identifier or that severely affected growth (casTLE effect size ≤ −2.5 and casTLE P value < 0.005) were not considered for further analysis but are included in Supplementary Table 3. Negative and positive reference genes were defined for growth and signaling phenotypes using previously defined gene sets (Supplementary Table 3). Precision-recall and ROC curves were computed in Matlab (Mathworks). Hit genes at 10% and 20% false discovery rate cutoffs were defined using the precision-recall threshold values at precision of 0.9 and 0.8, yielding P value cutoffs of 0.0163 and 0.0338, respectively. Ciliopathy-associated genes were defined from OMIM. Functional category enrichment analysis for 10% FDR hits was performed using the DAVID website’s Functional Annotation Chart tool using all mouse genes as the background. A second analysis was performed using human homologs of 10% FDR hits using all human genes as the background. Significance of overlap between the top 15 congenital heart defect genes reported by Sifrim et al. and P values from functional screening was assessed using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.
Quantification of Hh signaling assays
Blasticidin-based inhibition of cell growth was determined by normalizing raw CellTiter-Blue fluorescence such that growth in the absence of blasticidin corresponds to 100% growth. The IC50 for blasticidin was determined using Prism 7.0 (Graphpad Software).
Dual-luciferase data were analyzed by first subtracting background signal such that cells without luciferase give readings of zero. Firefly to Renilla (8x-Gli to constitutive) ratios were then calculated and normalized such that unstimulated control cells have a value equal to 1.
Quantification of fluorescence microscopy images
Microscopy images were analyzed using Fiji ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health) and a custom Matlab (Mathworks) script. Local background subtraction was performed on all images before analysis. To determine ciliary frequency, cells were manually scored for the presence or absence of a cilium using ARL13B and acetylated tubulin as ciliary markers. For analyses of ciliary length and intensity of ciliary markers, the ARL13B and/or acetylated tubulin channels were used to create a ciliary mask. The ciliary mask was then used to determine cilium length and measure ciliary signal in other channels. The γ-tubulin or ninein signal (staining centrioles) was used to orient cilia from base to tip. Tip fluorescence for GLI2 and GLI3 was defined as the summed fluorescence in the distal-most five pixels of each cilium. For ARMC9-FLAG localization, the ciliary fluorescence of each cilium was normalized to 1, and each axoneme was divided in 20 equal-distance bins.
Differences in cilium length distribution were tested for significance using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test in Matlab. Line plots of fluorescence intensity along cilia were generated in ImageJ.
Centriole counting measurements were done manually using γ-tubulin and centrin3 staining to guide centriole calling. Cell cycle stage was determined using DNA morphology, and statistical significance was determined using Fisher’s exact test. Cell counts for each of the five centriole number categories were used for statistical comparisons between genotypes.
Analysis of mass spectrometry data
MS/MS data were analyzed using both Preview and Byonic v2.10.5 (ProteinMetrics). All data were first analyzed in Preview to provide recalibration criteria if necessary and then reformatted to MGF format before full analysis with Byonic. Data were searched at 12 ppm mass tolerances for precursors, with 0.4 Da fragment mass tolerances assuming up to two missed cleavages and allowing for fully specific and ragged tryptic peptides. The database used was Uniprot for Mus musculus downloaded on 10/25/2016. These data were validated at a 1% false discovery rate using typical reverse-decoy techniques. The resulting identified peptide spectral matches and assigned proteins were then exported for further analysis using MatLab (MathWorks) to provide visualization and statistical characterization.
Analysis of CRISPR growth screen datasets
Gene-level growth phenotype data were downloaded from the Achilles website. Hierarchical clustering using uncentered correlation and average linkage settings was performed using Cluster 3.0 software, and clustered data were visualized in Java Treeview.
Phylogenetic analysis
Homologs for Tubd1 and Tube1 were either previously described  or identified using protein BLAST. Homologs for Tedc1 and Tedc2 were identified using iterative searches with PSI-BLAST. To analyze sequence divergence, homolog sequences were first aligned using Clustal Omega. Phylogenetic trees were generated via neighbor joining with distance correction using Simple Phylogeny  and visualized using Unrooted.
Statistical analysis of centriole number
Tests of statistical significance for differences in centriole number between conditions were calculated by two-sided Fisher’s exact test using Stata 14.2 (StataCorp).
CODE AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Software used for casTLE analysis can be found at http://bitbucket.org/dmorgens/castle. Matlab scripts for quantification of cilium intensities and length are available upon request.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data supporting the findings of this study are available within the paper and its Supplementary Information files, with the exception of raw Illumina sequencing data and sequencing-based analysis of CRISPR-induced mutations, which are available upon request.
Supplementary Material
Competing financial interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author Contributions
D.K.B., S.H., J.K.C., and M.V.N. conceived the project with advice from M.C.B. D.K.B. and S.H. developed the Hh pathway reporter screening strategy with assistance from B.K.V. D.W.M., K.H., A. L., G.T.H, and M.C.B. provided functional genomics expertise, the genome-wide sgRNA library, and software for screen data analysis. D.K.B. conducted the genome-wide screen and screen data analysis with assistance from S.H. and A.R.K. D.K.B., S.H., A.R.K., and M.C.K. functionally characterized hit genes of interest, analyzed data, and prepared figures. D.K.B., S.H., J.K.C., and M.V.N. wrote the manuscript with assistance from M.C.B. D.K.B, S.H., G.T.H., M.C.B, J.K.C. and M.V.N. provided funding for the project.
Development of a Hedgehog pathway reporter-based screening strategy
a) A transcriptional reporter combining 8 copies of the GLI binding sequence (Gli-BS) with a minimal promoter (Pmin) to convert Hh signals into blasticidin resistance. b) Blasticidin resistance was assayed across a range of concentrations in stimulated (+ShhN) and unstimulated 3T3-[Shh-BlastR;Cas9] cells. Representative curves of 5 independent experiments performed in duplicate. c) Overview of the Hh pathway, with key negative and positive regulators shown in red and green, respectively (left). Effects of control sgRNAs on blasticidin resistance in stimulated and unstimulated 3T3-[Shh-BlastR;Cas9] cells (right). Bars show mean inhibitory concentration 50 (IC50) values and circles show IC50 values from N = 2 (for gene-targeting sgRNAs) or 5 (for no sgRNA and negative control (Ctrl) sgRNA) independent experiments performed in duplicate. d) Overview of the screening strategy. Cells receiving a negative control sgRNA, a positive regulator-targeting sgRNA, and a negative regulator-targeting sgRNA are shaded grey, green, and red, respectively. e) Flow cytometry histograms of cell mixtures showing the fraction of GFP positive (Smo sgRNA-2, green) cells either in the absence of selection (left) or after two rounds of signaling and selection (right). Representative results from three independent experiments. f) Quantification of cell depletion as in (e).
Overview of genome-wide screen results
a) Scatter plot showing log2 of normalized sgRNA counts in selected versus unselected cell pools, with sgRNAs targeting select genes highlighted. b) Volcano plot of casTLE P values versus effect sizes for all genes (after filtering; see Methods), with select Hh pathway components highlighted. Green area indicates P-value cutoff corresponding to 10% false discovery rate (FDR); combined green and yellow areas indicate 20% FDR, with the number of genes in each area indicated. c) Schematic illustration of a primary cilium, with known structural features and select protein products of hit genes shown. Proteins shown are grouped by protein complex membership or localization, with select newly identified hits highlighted in bold, italic font. d) For the indicated categories, proteins encoded by hit genes identified are listed in order of statistical confidence. In addition to select gene ontology terms enriched among screen hits, the top 100 hits not otherwise listed in panels a–c are shown.
Evaluation of screen performance
a) Assessment of screen performance using 130 positive and 1386 negative reference genes, as determined by precision-recall analysis (left) and ROC curve (right), with the area under each curve (AUC) shown. Dashed lines indicate performance of a random classification model. b) Analysis of hit gene detection for select gene categories (N = number of genes in each category), with the fraction of hits detected at 10% or 20% FDR, not detected, or not determined shown; see Supplementary Table 3 for details. The NPHP category includes genes mutated exclusively in NPHP and not other ciliopathies. Abbreviations: SRTD (short rib thoracic dysplasia), JATD (Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia), OFD (Oral-Facial-Digital Syndrome). c) Hit gene identification is compared for the indicated datasets. Pie charts show the fraction of N=88 genes detected as hits across all genes included in part (b), except the NPHP-specific category; see Supplementary Fig. 3a for detail among individual categories.
Characterization of FAM92A and TTC23 as transition zone and EvC zone components
a) Induction of Hh pathway luciferase reporter is shown for cells transduced with the indicated sgRNAs and transfected with plasmids encoding Fam92a-3xFLAG (Fam92a) or GFP-FKBP (GFP). Cells were untreated or stimulated with SAG. Bars show mean of 4 replicate measurements (circles); one of two representative experiments. b) Analysis of cilia in 3T3-[Shh-BlastR;Cas9] cells transduced with the indicated sgRNAs. Bars show mean percentage of ciliated cells; dots show ciliated percentage in each of two independent experiments (>200 cells analyzed per datapoint). Scale bar: 5 μm c) Mass spectrometry analysis of FAM92A-associated proteins purified from IMCD3 cells. The normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF), the percent of each protein covered by identified peptides, and the percentile rank of the corresponding gene in the screen are indicated. d) FAM92A localizes to the transition zone of IMCD3 cells, distal to centrioles (γ-tubulin) and proximal to the ciliary membrane (ARL13B). One of two independent experiments (five fields of view each). Scale bars: 5 μm and 1 μm (insets). e) Mass spectrometry analysis of TTC23-associated proteins purified from IMCD3 cells. f) TTC23-LAP co-localizes with IQCE, distal to FAM92A, in IMCD3 cells. Line plots show normalized intensity along the length of the cilium; tick marks are 1 μm intervals. Representative images are shown from two independent experiments (five fields of view each). Scale bars: 5 μm and 1 μm (insets). g) The median and interquartile range of ciliary IQCE levels are shown for cells transduced with the indicated sgRNAs; one of two independent experiments. h) Ciliary TTC23-LAP and IQCE signals were analyzed following introduction of Iqce-targeting or control (Ctrl) siRNAs. The median, interquartile range (box boundaries), 10–90% percentile range (whiskers), and outliers are plotted for N=390 (Ctrl) and N=300 (Iqce) cilia. One of two (IQCE) or four (GFP) replicate experiments. Scale bars: 1 μm.
Insights into ciliopathies from previously uncharacterized screen hits
a) TXNDC15, with the transmembrane domain (TMD), thioredoxin domain, and MKS-associated mutation indicated (top). Luciferase reporter levels were measured for cells transduced with the indicated sgRNAs and transfected with plasmids encoding GFP-FKBP (GFP), wildtype Txndc15 (Tx-WT), or mutant Txndc15 (Tx-mut). Bars show mean of 3 replicates (circles); one of two representative experiments. b) Cilia were analyzed in 3T3-[Shh-BlastR;Cas9] cells transduced with the indicated sgRNAs. Bars in graph show percentage of cells with cilia that are normal, distorted, or absent. Each bar per condition represents an independent experiments with >200 cells counted. Scale bars: 5 μm and 1 μm (insets). c) Cilia were analyzed in 3T3-[Shh-BlastR;Cas9] cells transduced with the indicated sgRNAs. Representative images are shown at top. At bottom, the median cilium length, interquartile range (box boundaries), 10–90% percentile range (whiskers), and outliers are plotted. One of three independent experiments. Scale bars: 5 μm. d) Analysis of ARMC9-FLAG localization relative to centrioles (ninein) and ciliary membrane (ARL13B) is shown for IMCD3 cells treated as indicated. Scale bar: 1 μm. e) ARMC-FLAG intensity along the length of the cilium from base (position 0) to tip (position 1.0) was measured for IMCD3 cells treated as indicated. The mean and standard deviation are plotted after normalizing the total intensity in each cilium to 1.0; one of three representative experiments. f) Fluorescence intensity of GLI3 at the cilium tip was measured for the indicated cells in the presence or absence of ShhN. Mean and standard error of the mean are shown for each of N=3 independent experiments (at least 250 cilia analyzed per condition). g) Table showing select clinical features in canonical ciliopathies and their observation in the context of specific mutations and syndromes. Colors indicate high (red), moderate (orange) and low (yellow) prevalence.
TEDC1 and TEDC2 form a tetrameric complex with δ- and ε-tubulins
a) IMCD3 cells stably expressing TEDC2-LAP were immunostained with antibodies to centrin2 and γ-tubulin to visualize centrioles. Scale bar: 5 μm (2 μm for insets). Representative images are shown for three independent experiments. b) Mass spectrometry analysis of TEDC2-associated proteins purified from IMCD3 cells reveals TEDC1, ε-tubulin, δ-tubulin in nearly stoichiometric amounts, as well as α/β-tubulin and CENPJ. For each protein, the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF), the percent of the protein covered by identified peptides, and the percentile rank of the corresponding gene in the screen dataset are indicated. c) Binding of TEDC1 and TEDC2 was assessed via co-immunoprecipitations performed in HEK293T cells transfected with plasmids encoding the indicated proteins. Recovered proteins were analyzed by Western blot. Representative blots are shown for two independent experiments. See also Supplementary Fig. 6b and Supplementary Fig. 8.
The TED complex is required for centriole stability
a) Cells transduced with the indicated sgRNAs were stained with antibodies to ninein (centrioles) and polyglutamylated tubulin (GT335, centrioles and cilia). Scale bar: 5 μm. One of three representative experiments. b) Hierarchical clustering of relative growth scores across the indicated cell lines reveals that TEDC1, TEDC2, and TUBE1 share a similar pattern of relative fitness. Blue and red shading indicates decreased and increased proliferation relative to the average behavior across all cell lines. c) For cells transduced with the indicated sgRNAs, centrioles were visualized by staining with antibodies to centrin3 and γ-tubulin. Insets show centrin3 staining in mitotic cells, marked by yellow arrowheads. Scale bars: 5 μm (2 μm for insets). See also Supplementary Fig. 6h. One of three representative experiments. d) Centrioles marked by centrin3 and γ-tubulin were counted in cells at the indicated cell cycle stages. Statistically significant differences in centriole counts are shown for select conditions (*, P < 1×10−6; **, P < 1×10−10; ***, P < 1×10−60, determined by two-sided Fisher’s exact test).

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PMID 32156810 — Barrier-to-Autointegration Factor 1 Protects against a Basal cGAS-STING Response.
mBio (2020) · https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32156810/

Barrier-to-Autointegration Factor 1 Protects against a Basal cGAS-STING Response
Although the interferon (IFN) signaling pathway is a key host mechanism to restrict infection of a diverse range of viral pathogens, its unrestrained activity either at baseline or in the context of an immune response can result in host cell damage and injury. Here, we used a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screen and identified the DNA binding protein Barrier-to-autointegration factor 1 (Banf1) as a modulator of basal cell-intrinsic immunity. A loss of Banf1 expression resulted in higher level of cytosolic double-stranded DNA at baseline, which triggered IFN-stimulated gene expression via a cGAS-STING-IRF3 axis that did not require type I IFN or STAT1 signaling. Our experiments define a regulatory network in which Banf1 limits basal inflammation by preventing self DNA accumulation in the cytosol.
ABSTRACT
Although the pathogen recognition receptor pathways that activate cell-intrinsic antiviral responses are well delineated, less is known about how the host regulates this response to prevent sustained signaling and possible immune-mediated damage. Using a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screening approach to identify host factors that modulate interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) expression, we identified the DNA binding protein Barrier-to-autointegration factor 1 (Banf1), a previously described inhibitor of retrovirus integration, as a modulator of basal cell-intrinsic immunity. Ablation of Banf1 by gene editing resulted in chromatin activation near host defense genes with associated increased expression of ISGs, including Oas2, Rsad2 (viperin), Ifit1, and ISG15. The phenotype in Banf1-deficient cells occurred through a cGAS-, STING-, and IRF3-dependent signaling axis, was associated with reduced infection of RNA and DNA viruses, and was reversed in Banf1 complemented cells. Confocal microscopy and biochemical studies revealed that a loss of Banf1 expression resulted in higher level of cytosolic double-stranded DNA at baseline. Our study identifies an undescribed role for Banf1 in regulating the levels of cytoplasmic DNA and cGAS-dependent ISG homeostasis and suggests possible therapeutic directions for promoting or inhibiting cell-intrinsic innate immune responses.
INTRODUCTION
Mammalian cells detect and respond to RNA virus infection by recognizing non-self RNA elements through multiple pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs), including the cell surface and endosomal RNA sensors Toll-like receptors 3 and 7 (TLR3 and TLR7), and the cytoplasmic RNA sensors retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and melanoma-differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5). Binding of single- and/or double-stranded viral RNA to PRRs results in downstream activation of transcription factors, including interferon (IFN) regulatory factors 3 and 7 (IRF-3 and IRF-7) and NF-κB, and induction of IFN-α and -β. Secretion of IFNs, followed by engagement of the IFN-α/β receptor (IFNAR), in an autocrine and paracrine fashion activates JAK/STAT-dependent signal transduction cascades that induce the expression of hundreds of ISGs, many of which have antiviral activity. In addition to using RNA sensors, cells use DNA-sensing machinery to detect DNA viruses or intracellular damage generated early during infection by RNA or DNA viruses. As an example, leaked DNA from the mitochondria or nucleus is detected by the DNA sensor cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS), which triggers the stimulator of IFN genes (STING) and induction of type I IFN and ISGs. At each stage of the immune response, stimulatory and inhibitory signals regulate the magnitude, quality, and character of the response. Positive regulators amplify immune response to clear viral infection, whereas negative regulators dampen inflammatory responses to prevent immune-mediated tissue damage and spontaneous autoimmunity.
Several ISGs can temper PRR and type I IFN responses (reviewed in references and). As examples, the IFN-induced ring finger protein 125 (RNF125) can target RIG-I, MDA5, and MAVS for ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradation. Members of the tripartite motif (TRIM) family of E3 ubiquitin ligases inhibit IFN production by targeting of key signaling molecules (e.g., TRIF, TBK1, and IKKβ) or transcription factors (IRF3, IRF7, and NF-κB) for ubiquitin-mediated degradation. The suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) family of proteins negatively regulates inflammation by targeting the tyrosine kinase activity of Janus kinases (JAK), which inhibits JAK/STAT signaling pathways and attenuates antiviral responses.
We set out to identify novel negative regulators of ISG induction in hopes of identifying targets for inhibition that might allow enhanced viral clearance during acute infections. We performed a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screen in BV2 microglial cells and evaluated for genes that, when edited, resulted in increased cell surface expression of Bst2 (tetherin), a well-described ISG with antiviral activity against multiple enveloped RNA and retroviruses. One of our top “hits” was Barrier-to-autointegration factor 1 (Banf1), a small (10 kDa) conserved DNA-binding protein with homeostatic functions in mitosis, nuclear assembly, and the DNA damage response that also can recognize foreign DNA and prevent chromosomal integration or genome replication. Banf1 is expressed normally in the inner nuclear membrane but can relocalize to the cytoplasm depending on the stage of cell cycle and age of the cell. In addition, Banf1 can bind to exogenous double-stranded DNA in the cytosol after endosomal breakdown to avoid autophagy.
In our study, editing of Banf1 in BV2 mouse microglial cells (ΔBanf1) resulted in increased surface expression of Bst2 and higher mRNA levels of several antiviral ISGs, including Rsad2 and Oas2, and this occurred even when type I IFN signaling was blocked. Reciprocally, ΔBanf1 cells complemented with wild-type Banf1 demonstrated lower levels of ISGs than control, nonedited cells. These results with control, ΔBanf1, and ΔBanf1+Banf1 cells were confirmed by RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) analysis, and parallel chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-Seq) studies revealed that ΔBanf1 cells had active chromatin surrounding several host defense genes. Loss of Banf1 expression was associated with reduced infection of RNA and DNA viruses, and the enhanced expression of ISGs was mediated by a pathway requiring cGAS, STING, and IRF3. Decreased expression of Banf1 also was associated with increased levels of cytosolic double-stranded DNA, which likely triggered recognition by cGAS. Collectively, these results suggest that Banf1, in addition to its established ability to inhibit retrovirus integration and DNA virus replication, regulates levels of endogenous cytoplasmic double-stranded DNA at baseline, which prevents adventitious cGAS-STING activation and cellular ISG responses.
RESULTS
A genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screen identifies Banf1 as a negative regulator of ISG expression.
To screen for negative regulators of the IFN pathway, we established a flow cytometry-based strategy with BV2 microglia cells using Bst2 (tetherin), a cell surface protein induced by type I IFNs (Fig. 1A), as an indicator of altered ISG expression (Fig. 1B). Since Usp18 is an established negative regulator of the IFN pathway, we generated ΔUsp18 BV2 cells (see Fig. S1A in the supplemental material) as a positive control to validate the screening approach. When treated with intermediate (10 to 100 IU/ml) doses of IFN-β, ΔUsp18 BV2 cells differentially showed higher levels of Bst2 on the cell surface than did control cells (Fig. S1B). Based on these data, we used BV2-Cas9 cells with two independent CRISPR libraries, each with greater than 20,000 small guide RNAs (sgRNA) targeting all of the protein-coding genes in the mouse genome. The top 1% of cells expressing of the highest levels of Bst2 were sorted by flow cytometry. After expansion in culture, a second round of sorting was performed, and the cells expressing the highest surface levels of Bst2 again were collected. Subsequently, genomic DNA was recovered, deep sequencing of the guide RNAs was performed, and gene enrichment was determined using MAGeCK analysis (Table S1). We manually picked genes (e.g., Banf1, Cmas, Dhps, Gale, and Mgat2; Fig. S2A) that ranked in the top 150 of both libraries for validation using two independent sgRNA (Fig. S2B). Only one gene, Banf1, showed the desired phenotype of elevated levels of ISGs (Rsad2 [viperin] and Ifit1) in the two gene-edited cells compared to control sgRNA cells (Fig. S2C). To rule out possible off-target effects, five additional sgRNA against Banf1 were tested in bulk cell lines (Fig. S2D); these cells showed that a deficiency of Banf1 expression resulted in enhanced ISG levels at baseline, even in the absence of exogenous IFN-β treatment. To confirm our findings, we generated a clonal ΔBanf1 BV2 cell line (Fig. 1C and Fig. S2E), which showed elevated levels of ISGs (Rsad2 and Oas2), and performed complementation (ΔBanf1 + Banf1), which rescued the phenotype (Fig. 1D). Of note, ΔBanf1 cell line was not a complete null, since small amounts of Banf1 were detected in immunoblots (Fig. 1C); this expression pattern was anticipated as a complete loss of Banf1 is lethal during embryogenesis in invertebrates. Notwithstanding this point, the cell viability and metabolic activity of uninfected ΔBanf1 hypomorphic cells were equivalent to the control or complemented cells (Fig. S2F to G).
A genome-wide CRISPR screen identified Banf1 as a negative regulator of ISG expression. (A) Bst2, an ISG expressed on the cell surface, was used as a marker for a FACS-based screen for regulators of type I IFN signaling. Cell surface levels of Bst2 were determined after 16 h of IFN-β stimulation in WT or Usp18−/− cells. Usp18 is an established negative regulator of type I IFN signaling. (B) Flow chart of a FACS-based screen to identify negative regulators of ISG expression. BV2 mouse microglial cells that were transduced with a CRISPR-Cas9 library were treated with a threshold dose of IFN-β and then sorted (top 1%) for high level of Bst2 expression. After expansion, this procedure was repeated once, and then sgRNA sequences were recovered after next-generation sequencing. (C and D) Banf1 was identified as a negative regulator of ISG expression. (C) An immunoblot shows the Banf1 protein levels in different clonal cells (WT and Banf1 mutant BV2 cells [ΔBanf1] complemented with Banf1 [TC] or empty vector). The data are representative of three experiments. (D) mRNA levels of Rsad2 and Oas2, two representative ISGs, in ΔBanf1 cells. This phenotype is reversed by the ectopic expression of Banf1. The data are normalized to WT control complemented with a control vector and expressed as means ± standard deviations (SD). Three experiments were each performed in triplicate, and the results were assessed using one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s posttest (****, P < 0.0001).
A deficiency in Banf1 results in global ISG expression.
Our results suggested a role for Banf1 in regulating basal ISG expression. To evaluate this in greater detail, we paired global transcriptome and epigenetic profiling assays in BV2 cells deficient in Banf1 (ΔBanf1), complemented with Banf1 (TC), or control lines (WT). We first conducted RNA-Seq analysis to identify differentially expressed genes. In ΔBanf1 BV2 cells, highly upregulated genes (cutoff = 3× higher expression than WT cells and >3 reads per kb per million [RPKM]) were mostly ISGs (26 of 28) (Fig. 2A). Indeed, the gene ontology response pathway to type I IFN (GO 0034340) was highly enriched in ΔBanf1 BV2 cells (enrichment false discovery rate of 2.79E–11). We next determined the activation status of genes using histone 3 lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac) chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-Seq), since this mark correlates with active enhancers and transcription. As an example, the Rsad2 promoter and a nearby putative enhancer were active in the ΔBanf1 cells but inactive in WT and TC cells, whereas the β-actin gene loci showed no difference in H3K27 acetylation status in any of the three cells (Fig. 2B). To extend these observations, we compared H3K27 acetylation status on a genome-wide level in TC and ΔBanf1 cells (Fig. 2C and Fig. S3). Most of the regulatory elements with differential H3K27 acetylation were proximal to known ISGs. Indeed, an unbiased analysis using linked differential gene expression with chromatin activation, revealed that the majority of direct targets in the ΔBanf1 BV2 cells were established ISGs (gene enrichment overlap with interferon alpha response P = 5e–17 [hypergenometric test]).
A deficiency of Banf1 results in global ISG upregulation and antiviral effects. (A to D) RNA-Seq and ChIP-seq analyses in control (WT), ΔBanf1, and ΔBanf1+Banf1 complemented (TC) BV2 cells. (A) Upregulated genes identified with RNA-Seq in ΔBanf1 cells compared to WT and to TC BV2 cells, with an at least 3× higher expression and a minimum of three RPKM (reads per kb per million). The majority of these genes (26 of 28) are ISGs (http://www.interferome.org/interferome/home.jspx). (B) UCSC Genome Browser snapshots showing gene location and H3K27 acetylation values (RPKM) for Rsad2 (top) and Actb (bottom) loci in control (WT), ΔBanf1+Banf1 complemented (TC), or ΔBanf1 BV2 cells. The Rsad2 promoter and a nearby putative enhancer are highlighted by rectangular frames. (C) MA (Bland-Altman) plot showing the H3K27 acetylation values from ΔBanf1 or TC cells. Gray dots indicate H3K27 acetylation peaks whose values differ at least 2-fold between groups and are above an average of 4 RPKM. Red labels indicate selected genes proximal (within 10 kb) of indicated H3K27ac peaks. (D) Multistep growth curve of HSV-1 (MOI of 0.05) and WNV-Kunjin virus (MOI of 0.01) in WT, ΔBanf1, and TC BV2 cells. The virus titer is expressed as PFU (for HSV-1) or as focus-forming units (FFU; for WNV-Kunjin) per ml. The data are from three experiments with duplicates (for HSV-1) or triplicates (for WNV-Kunjin). Two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s posttest was performed (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001). Red asterisks, comparison of ΔBanf1 to WT cells; blue asterisks, comparison of TC to WT cells. Dotted lines indicate limits of detection of the assay. (E) Single-step infection with chimeric SINV-EEEV (MOI of 20, 6 h) and VSV-GFP (MOI of 3, 6.5 h). Infection was measured by flow cytometry. Infectivity is shown as the product of the percentage of infected cells multiplied by the MFI of the positive cells. The data are normalized to values of WT and are shown as means ± SD. Three experiments were each performed in triplicate, and the results were assessed using one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s posttest (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001; n.s., not significant).
A deficiency in Banf1 is associated with reduced viral infection.
Given the higher basal level of ISGs in ΔBanf1 cells, we hypothesized they might contribute to resistance to virus infections. To evaluate this idea, we assessed infection of positive-sense RNA viruses including a flavivirus (West Nile virus [WNV]-Kunjin virus) and an alphavirus (chimeric Eastern equine encephalitis virus (SINV-EEEV), a negative-sense RNA virus (vesicular stomatitis virus [VSV]), and a DNA virus (herpes simplex virus 1 [HSV-1]) in ΔBanf1 BV2 cells; these viruses were selected because they replicated efficiently in parental BV2 cells. Multistep growth curve analysis showed that a deficiency of Banf1 was associated with less infection by HSV-1 and WNV-Kunjin compared to control cells (Fig. 2D). To evaluate further the effect of Banf1 expression on the basal or rapidly induced ISG response, we analyzed viral replication under inoculation conditions with high and low multiplicities of infection with SINV-EEEV and VSV. These experiments showed that ΔBanf1 BV2 cells were more resistant than control cells (Fig. 2E and Fig. S4). Reciprocally, ΔBanf1 + Banf1 complemented BV2 cells, which had lower levels of ISG mRNA at baseline (Fig. 2A and C), showed greater infection with WNV-Kunjin and SINV-EEEV (Fig. 2D and E and Fig. S4).
Basal ISG expression in ΔBanf1 cells is independent of type I IFN signaling.
Our initial experiments showed that the induction of ISGs associated with decreased Banf1 expression did not require exogenous IFN-β administration (Fig. S2C-D). We also found no upregulation of IFN-β mRNA in ΔBanf1 cells (Fig. 3A). Since ISG induction can happen in a type I IFN-independent manner (e.g., via IRF3 activation), we first assessed whether the IFN signaling pathway was required for the ISG phenotype in ΔBanf1 cells. Administration of an inhibitor of Jak activity did not fully rescue the ISG upregulation phenotype (Fig. 3B). We next edited Banf1 expression in wild-type (WT) and Ifnar1−/− murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). As expected, ΔBanf1 WT MEFs had higher levels of ISGs (e.g., Rsad2 and Ifit1) than control gene-edited WT MEFs. Remarkably, ΔBanf1 Ifnar1−/− MEFs had a similar phenotype as ΔBanf1 WT MEFs (Fig. 3C to E). We confirmed these findings in ΔStat1 gene-edited BV2 cells (Fig. 3F and Fig. S5A and B). Thus, in BV2 cells and fibroblasts, the ISG induction associated with loss of Banf1 expression occurred independently of type I IFN signaling.
ISGs are upregulated in ΔBanf1 cells independently of type I IFN signaling. (A) IFNβ1 gene expression in WT and ΔBanf1 BV2 cells. Three experiments were each performed in triplicate, and the results were assessed using an unpaired Student t test on pooled data (n.s., not significant). (B) Inhibition of JAK signaling activity with 10 μM ruxolitinib does not affect ISG (Rsad2, left; Oas2, right) upregulation phenotype in ΔBanf1 BV2 cells. (C) WT and Ifnar1−/− MEFs that were edited via CRISPR-Cas9 with a control or Banf1 sgRNA and evaluated for ISG (Rsad2 and Ifit1) expression at baseline by qRT-PCR. (D) The Ifnar1 deficiency was confirmed by flow cytometry. (E) Banf1 expression was reduced after gene editing as shown by immunoblotting. (F) The Stat1 gene was edited in BV2 cells. WT cells and a clonal ΔStat1 BV2 cells (Fig. S5) were then edited with a control or Banf1 sgRNA and evaluated for ISG (Rsad2 and Oas2) expression by qRT-PCR. (B, C, and F) Data are means ± SD. Three experiments were each performed in triplicate, and the results were assessed using two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s posttest on pooled data (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001).
ISG expression in ΔBanf1 cells occurs via a cGAS/STING/IRF3 pathway.
Prior studies have suggested that Banf1 might regulate DNA damage responses. We hypothesized that a loss of Banf1 expression might trigger sensing of self-DNA and innate immune signaling. To evaluate this hypothesis, we first tested whether a pharmacological inhibitor of STING (NO2-FA) could rescue the ISG phenotype in ΔBanf1 BV2 cells. At concentrations that do not cause cellular cytotoxicity (Fig. S6A), treatment with the STING inhibitor partially reduced ISG expression at baseline in ΔBanf1 but not wild-type control cells (Fig. 4A). To corroborate these results, we edited Banf1 expression in WT and STING KO MEFs (Fig. S6B). In wild-type MEFs, loss of Banf1 expression resulted in upregulation of several ISGs. In contrast, in STING KO cells, editing of Banf1 had no impact on ISG expression (Fig. 4B). Given that the Banf1-dependent ISG phenotype was mediated through STING, we next defined the pathway by editing a more comprehensive set of DNA sensors (e.g., Aim2, cGAS, Ddx41, Ifi204, Pqbp1, Pyhin1, and Zbp1) and signaling molecules (e.g., STING, Irf1, Irf3, and Irf8) in ΔBanf1 BV2 cells. Among the target genes tested, only editing of cGAS, STING, and Irf3 resulted in loss of ISG expression in ΔBanf1 BV2 cells (Fig. 4C and D and Fig. S7).
ISG upregulation in ΔBanf1 cells occurs via a cGAS-STING-IRF3 pathway. (A) In ΔBanf1 BV2 cells, the ISG induction phenotype is rescued partially by treatment with NO2-FA (10 μM for 15 min), an inhibitor of STING. Three experiments were each performed in triplicate, and the results were assessed using two-way ANOVA (****, P < 0.0001). (B) Banf1 was edited using CRISPR-Cas9 in STING−/− and WT MEFs. Expression of Rsad2 and Oas2 mRNA is shown. Three experiments were each performed in triplicate, and the results were assessed using two-way ANOVA (****, P < 0.0001). (C) The indicated DNA sensors and signaling molecules were edited using CRISPR-Cas9 in ΔBanf1 BV2 cells. Two guide RNAs (sgRNA) were used for each gene. The expression levels of Rsad2 (top) and Oas2 (bottom) mRNA are shown and were normalized to β-actin. Three experiments were each performed in triplicate, and the results were assessed using one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s posttest (***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001). (D) Immunoblotting of cGAS, STING, Irf1, Irf3, and β-actin in gene-edited BV2 cells. The cell sample for Irf1 was treated with IFN-γ (50 ng/ml for 4 h) before harvesting and lysis. The data are representative of two experiments.
A deficiency in Banf1 results in accumulation of double-stranded DNA in the cytosol.
A recently published CRISPR/Cas9 screen showed that STAG2 regulated the cGAS pathway by preventing a DNA damage response; accordingly, a loss of STAG2 expression resulted in increased levels of cytoplasmic DNA and induction of type I IFNs and ISGs. Given the apparent similarities, we evaluated whether a deficiency of Banf1 resulted in activation of the DNA damage response by measuring phosphorylation of the histone variant H2AX (γH2AX). However, we did not observe higher levels of γH2AX in Banf1 deficient BV2 cells and MEFs relative to control (WT) or Banf1 complemented cells, as judged by Western blotting (Fig. S8A and B) or immunofluorescence microscopy (Fig. S8C to E). Moreover, a loss of expression of Banf1 also was not associated with formation of micronuclei in these cells (Fig. S8F). Thus, Banf1 and STAG2, despite their similar effects on the cGAS-STING-IRF3 signaling pathway, likely act through different mechanisms. We also inhibited the replication of endogenous retroviruses with antiretroviral nucleoside inhibitors but observed no effect on basal ISG expression in cells lacking Banf1 (Fig. S8G).
Because of the effects on cGAS activation, we next assessed by confocal microscopy whether a loss of Banf1 expression resulted in basal accumulation of DNA in the cytosol. Indeed, we observed substantially higher levels of double-stranded DNA puncta in the cytosol of ΔBanf1 BV2 cells than WT or Banf1-complemented cells (Fig. 5A and B). To corroborate these findings, we performed cell fractionation and PCR experiments to quantify the relative abundance of nuclear (18S) and mitochondrial (Cox1) gene DNA in the cytosol of the different BV2 cells. The cytosolic levels of both the 18S nuclear and Cox1 mitochondrial genes were higher in ΔBanf1 BV2 cells than in WT and Banf1-complemented cells (Fig. 5C and D). To assess the effect of a loss of Banf1 expression on mitochondrial morphology, we performed additional staining. Although no substantive change in mitochondrial morphology was observed in Banf1 BV2 cells, a deficiency of Banf1 was associated with decreases in mitochondrial membrane potential (Fig. 5E and F), which is an indicator of mitochondrial permeability.
Higher levels of double-stranded DNA in the cytosol of Banf1-deficient cells. (A) Cytoplasmic DNA was evaluated in wild-type (WT), ΔBanf1, and Banf1 complemented (TC) ΔBanf1 BV2 cells using an anti-double-stranded DNA antibody. Confocal microscopy shows cytoplasmic DNA spots (anti-double-stranded DNA, green) and nuclei (DAPI, blue). Scale bar, 10 μm. Five experiments were conducted, with 15 to 20 fields viewed each. (B) Cytoplasmic DNA spots were quantified with Velocity imaging software for 300 to 1,000 cells of each experiment. The number of double-stranded DNA spots per cell was compared using a one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s posttest (**, P < 0.01; n.s., not significant). (C) The abundance of a nuclear 18S gene in the cytosol and nucleus was measured with qPCR in WT, ΔBanf1, and TC BV2 cells (three experiments; one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s posttest; ***, P < 0.001; n.s., not significant). (D) The mitochondrial gene Cox1 also shows higher levels in cytosol of ΔBanf1 BV2 cells than WT and TC cells (three experiments; one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s posttest; ****, P < 0.0001; n.s., not significant). (E and F) A loss of Banf1 expression results in decreased potential of the mitochondrial membrane. (E) Mitochondria were stained with MitoTracker Green (green, independent of mitochondria membrane potential) and tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester (TMRM, red, requires intact mitochondrial potential). In ΔBanf1 BV2 cells, less TMRM staining is seen. The images are representative of three experiments. (F) The level of TMRM staining was quantified with flow cytometry. Three experiments were each performed, and the results were assessed using one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s posttest (***, P < 0.001; n.s., not significant).
DISCUSSION
Using a CRISPR-Cas9 genome-wide screen that was designed to identify negative regulators of the IFN signaling pathway and ISG expression, we identified Banf1 as a gene that inhibited cell surface expression of Bst2, a well-characterized ISG. However, rather than modulate type I IFN signaling directly, editing of Banf1 resulted in greater basal expression of multiple ISGs, and this effect occurred through a cGAS-STING-IRF3 pathway. Unexpectedly, our screen failed to identify any established negative regulators (e.g., SOCS genes or others) of the IFNAR signaling pathway. Although further analysis is warranted, the dose or timing of exposure of IFN-β used may have desensitized an IFN signaling response, which could have precluded the identification of negative regulators of the pathway.
When Banf1 expression was reduced, we observed global changes in transcription of ISGs and alteration of the epigenetic state with histone acetylation of the ISG promoters. Mechanistic studies revealed that Banf1 prevents accumulation of self, double-stranded DNA in cytosol, which minimizes recognition by cGAS and activation of the STING pathway. A loss of expression of Banf1 expression in BV2 cells or MEFs, however, was not associated with diminished cell viability or rates of proliferation or induction of canonical DNA damage responses. Instead, double-stranded DNA accumulated in the cytoplasm of ΔBanf1 cells from both nuclear and mitochondrial sources. The higher levels of double-stranded DNA resulted in basal ISG expression, which reduced infection of several RNA and DNA viruses. Reciprocally, ectopic expression of Banf1 resulted in lower ISG levels at baseline and greater WNV-Kunjin and SINV-EEEV infection. Together, these findings suggest that Banf1 expression levels under homeostatic conditions may regulate amounts of double-stranded DNA in the cytoplasm and help to set the basal ISG tone that primes antiviral defenses. Further studies are required to assess whether immune and nonimmune cells and quiescent and dividing cells differentially express Banf1 and ISGs. It is plausible that some cells might regulate basal expression of ISGs in a cGAS-dependent manner by modulating expression of Banf1. Notwithstanding our findings showing that Banf1 expression attenuates basal expression of ISGs, in other contexts Banf1 can have direct antiviral effects. With retroviruses, Banf1 acts as a barrier to chromosomal integration and, for poxviruses, it acts to inhibit replication of exogenous viral DNA in the cytoplasm.
Our initial analysis suggested that Banf1 might act analogously to other recently described genes that modulate cGAS activation, type I IFN production, and ISG expression, including Trex1, ATM, LATS1/2, and STAG2, as well as the genes causing Fanconi anemia and Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. However, these studies suggested that the DNA damage responses or activation of retroviral or transposon elements from the chromosome are the source of DNA that activates the intracellular sensing and innate immune signaling pathways. Unexpectedly, in the Banf1-deficient cells we tested, we did not detect activation of the DNA damage response as judged by an absence of expression of the marker γH2AX or evidence of staining in cytoplasm. In comparison, some individuals with progeroid syndrome encode a homozygous mutation in Banf1 that impairs protein stability and is associated with fibroblasts having nuclear lamina abnormalities. It remains possible that nuclear chromatin fragments in the cytoplasm exist in Banf1-deficient cells; however, these are too small to activate canonical pH2A.X signaling, but they are large enough to be sensed by cGAS.
In separate studies, we inhibited the replication of endogenous retroviruses with antiretroviral nucleoside inhibitors but observed no effect on basal ISG expression in cells lacking Banf1. In both BV2 microglial cells and MEFs, the enhanced ISG expression observed in the setting of reduced expression of Banf1 occurred independently of type I IFN signaling or Stat1 expression. However, Banf1-modulated ISG expression was dependent on IRF3, which can regulate a set of ISGs directly, independently of IFN expression or signaling. Future studies in additional cell types are warranted to define why a loss of Banf1 expression and activation of a cytosolic recognition occurs through an IRF3-dependent yet IFN-independent pathway.
In cells from premature aging syndromes, damaged nuclear DNA leaks to the cytosol, accumulates when the machinery to remove or degrade this DNA malfunctions, and induces an inflammatory cytokine response via the STING pathway. Banf1 is a component of the nuclear lamina and can bind double-stranded DNA as a highly ordered nucleoprotein complex in a sequence-independent manner. Indeed, Banf1 acts as a bridge between chromosomal DNA and nuclear membrane proteins and has a critical function in nuclear reassembly during mitosis. Consistent with these data, although we reduced Banf1 expression using multiple sgRNA and gene editing in both BV2 cells and MEFs, we never obtained a complete null, as determined by gene sequencing and immunoblotting. Banf1 protein also was observed to accumulate at sites of nuclear envelope rupture in the context of cancer cell migration and deformation through tight interstitial spaces. These studies link Banf1 to control or protection against accumulation of double-stranded DNA in the cytoplasm presumably from nuclear sources. Indeed, we observed accumulation of nuclear DNA in the cytosol in cells deficient in the expression of Banf1, which could accumulate over multiple rounds of cell division even without marked effects on cell division or viability. Beyond its role in limiting accumulation of double-stranded DNA from nuclear sources, our experiments suggest that Banf1 also may directly or indirectly affect mitochondrial integrity or function. Our cell fractionation studies showed an enrichment of mitochondrial DNA in the cytosol in Banf1-deficient cells, and this was associated with altered mitochondrial potential but not morphology. Even moderate mitochondrial stress in Banf1-deficient cells might lead to the release of damage-associated molecular patterns that activate innate immunity via cGAS and STING. What remains uncertain is the linkage between Banf1 and mitochondrial integrity, and whether Banf1 has additional functions in regulating mitophagy, which limits activation of cGAS and STING by minimizing levels of cytosolic mitochondrial DNA. Another unresolved question is where cGAS localizes in Banf1-deficient cells to trigger double-stranded DNA binding and ISG induction. Although we attempted to perform immunofluorescence microscopy with commercial anti-mouse cGAS antibodies, these results were difficult to interpret because of background staining in cGAS−/− cells. In the field, consensus is lacking as to where cGAS recognizes self and foreign DNA. In addition to its described localization in the cytosol, cGAS can be tethered to the nucleus or localized to the plasma membrane via the actions of an N-terminal phosphoinositide-binding domain.
Overall, our studies add to an emerging literature that defines how different families of proteins regulate accumulation of host DNA in the cytoplasm. This regulatory network is critical for cellular homeostasis to enable a rapid innate immune response to pathogens but also limit adventitious inflammation under settings (e.g., cell division, stress, and deformation) when self DNA may accumulate in the cytosol.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cells, viruses and reagents.
BV2 microglial cells (a gift from Stephanie Karst, University of Florida), C57BL/6 MEFs, and BHK-21, Vero, and HEK 293T cells (ATCC) were cultured in Dulbecco modified Eagle medium (DMEM) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% HEPES, and 1% penicillin-streptomycin unless otherwise indicated. For BV2 cells and MEFs, 2.5 μg/ml of puromycin (InvivoGen), 4 μg/ml blasticidin (InvivoGen), and 200 μg/ml hygromycin (InvivoGen) were added for plasmid selection depending on the application.
The following viruses were used: chimeric SINV-EEEV-GFP, VSV-GFP (Indiana), HSV-1 (strain 17), and WNV-Kunjin. Because EEEV is a BSL-3 select agent pathogen, we used the chimeric SINV-EEEV BSL-2 pathogen that incorporates the nonstructural genes and RNA replication control elements of a Sindbis virus (SINV; strain TR339) with the structural genes (C-E3-E2-6K-E1) of an EEEV isolate (strain FL93-939); the green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter gene was added to an additional subgenomic promoter. SINV-EEEV-GFP was propagated in BHK-21 cells, and titers were determined by a focus forming assay (FFA). WNV-Kunjin was propagated in Vero cells and titrated by FFA, and VSV-GFP and HSV-1 were propagated in Vero cells and titrated by plaque assays. The Jak1/2 inhibitor ruxolitinib (INCB018424) was purchased from Selleckchem (catalog no. S1378). Cells were treated at 10 μM ruxolitinib or vehicle for 12 h. The STING signaling inhibitor NO2-FA was obtained (Cayman Chemicals), together with control lipids. Cells were treated with 10 μM NO2-FA for 15 min and washed with fresh media, and samples were harvested 10 h later to minimize possible cytotoxic effects. The nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (lamivudine [3TC]) used in this study was USP grade and obtained commercially (Aurobindo Pharma). Cells were treated with 10 μM 3TC for 2 weeks and harvested for quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR).
Cell viability and cytotoxicity assays were conducted using the luminescent cell viability assay (CellTiter-Glo; Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Luminescence was analyzed on a reader (BioTek Synergy H1) at room temperature with a 0.5-s integration time per well. Cell counting was conducted by flow cytometry (MACSQuant 10; Miltenyi Biotec).
Gene editing with CRISPR/Cas9.
Oligonucleotides for sgRNA (for the sequences, see Table S2A) were synthesized commercially (Integrated DNA Technology), cloned into the plasmid lentiCRISPR v.2 (Addgene 52961), and packaged by cotransfection with two helper plasmids (psPAX2 [Addgene, catalog no. 12260] and pMD2.G [Addgene, catalog no. 12259]) into HEK-293T cells with Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The sgRNAs selected were the top two optimized guides from a designed library for maximum gene-editing activity and minimum off-target effects. Cells were transduced with lentiviruses expressing individual sgRNA and selected with puromycin for 7 days. An irrelevant sgRNA (GAAGTTCGAGGGCGACACCC) with no target in the mouse genome also was transduced as a negative control. For some experiments, cells were isolated by limiting-dilution single-cell cloning. Gene editing at the target site was evaluated by next generation sequencing on an Illunima HiSeq 2500 platform (Genome Technology Access Center, Washington University) and/or Western blotting.
Flow cytometry.
For staining of cell surface antigen, cells were detached with Cellstripper (Corning) and resuspended in PBS with 0.5% FBS and 1 mM EDTA (FACS [fluorescence-activated cell sorting] buffer). Bst2 was stained with phycoerythrin (PE)-labeled anti-Bst2 (BioLegend, clone 129C1; 1:500 in FACS buffer) and anti-mouse CD16/CD32 (eBioscience; 1:250 in FACS buffer) on ice for 45 min. Ifnar1 was stained with 1 μg/ml of anti-mouse Ifnar1 (clone MAR1-5A3; BioXcell) at room temperature for 45 min, followed by incubation with a goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) Alexa Fluor 647 (Thermo Fisher, catalog no. A21236; 1:1,000 in FACS buffer) at room temperature for 30 min. For cells infected with GFP-labeled viruses (SINV-EEEV-GFP and VSV-GFP), cells were detached with trypsin and fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde (PFA) at room temperature for 15 min. Flow cytometry was performed on a MACSQuant Analyzer 10 (Miltenyi Biotec), and data were analyzed using FlowJo 10.6.1.
CRISPR-Cas9 genome-wide screen.
The mouse Asiago sgRNA CRISPR library in BV2 cells has been published and was a gift (Herbert Virgin, Washington University). The library contains four independent sublibraries, each containing a unique sgRNA targeting each of 20,077 mouse genes. We used two of the sublibraries (1 and 5) for the screen. For each sublibrary, 2 × 107 cells containing sgRNAs were seeded into two T-175 tissue culture flasks and cultured for 16 h. Cells were treated with 40 IU/ml mouse IFN-β (PBL Assay Science) for 16 h and detached with Cellstripper (Corning). Cells were incubated with PE-labeled anti-Bst2 (BioLegend, clone 129C1) and anti-mouse CD16/CD32 (eBioscience) on ice for 45 min. The cells were sorted for the population with highest (top 1%) surface expression of Bst2 using a MoFlo high-speed cell sorter (Beckman Coulter, Siteman Flow Cytometry Core, Washington University) and expanded in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS. When enough cells accumulated (2 × 107), a second round of sorting was conducted. Subsequently, genomic DNA was extracted from the control cells (2 × 107) and sorted cells (1 × 107), respectively. The sgRNA enriched was amplified and subjected to next generation sequencing using an Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform (Genome Technology Access Center, Washington University). The sgRNA sequences against specific genes were determined after removal of the tag sequences using the FASTX-Toolkit (http://hannonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit/) and cutadapt 1.8.1. sgRNA sequences were analyzed using a published computational tool (MAGeCK) (see Table S1).
Hit validation.
Genes with the highest rankings in both library screens were validated using two independent sgRNAs (Fig. S2). The sgRNAs were cloned into the plasmid lentiCRISPR v.2; lentiviruses were generated and BV2 cells were transduced as described above. An irrelevant sgRNA (GAAGTTCGAGGGCGACACCC) with no target in the mouse genome also was transduced as a control.
For complementation of Banf1 expression, the full-length mouse Banf1 open reading frame corresponding to the transcript (NM_001038231.2) was synthesized (Integrated DNA Technologies) and cloned into the lentivirus vector pLV-EF1α-IRES-BLAST (Addgene 85133) between BamHI and MluI restriction enzyme sties. The Banf1 sgRNA target sequence and the PAM sequence were mutated synonymously (TGACGTCCTGAGCAAGAGGC to TGACGTCCTGAGTAAAAGAC; TGG to TCG) to avoid recutting of the reintroduced gene. Lentiviruses were generated as described above. Cells transduced with lentiviruses were selected with 4 μg/ml blasticidin (InvivoGen) for 7 days. An empty vector was transduced as a negative control. The ectopic expression of Banf1 was confirmed with Western blotting.
Viral infections.
BV2 cells were inoculated with SINV-EEEV-GFP (multiplicity of infection [MOI] of 20) for 6 h or VSV-GFP (MOI of 3) for 6.5 h. Low-MOI infections also were conducted using an MOI of 0.001 for 30 h for SINV-EEEV-GFP and an MOI of 0.001 for 18 h for VSV-GFP. Cells were harvested using trypsin digestion and fixed in 1% PFA for 15 min at room temperature. Cells then were subjected to flow cytometric analysis (MACSQuant Analyzer 10; Miltenyi Biotec) using FlowJo software (Tree Star). Virus infection was defined as a product of the percentage of GFP-positive cells multiplied by the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of the positive cells. Growth curves of HSV-1 and WNV-Kunjin was conducted by inoculating BV2 cells at MOIs of 0.05 and 0.01, respectively. Supernatants were collected at specified time points, and titers were determined with a plaque-forming assay (HSV-1) or an FFA (WNV-Kunjin).
Western blotting.
Cell lysates were prepared using radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (Thermo Fisher) supplemented with a cocktail of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo Fisher) on ice. Protein concentration was determined with a BCA protein assay (Pierce, catalog no. 23227). Gel electrophoresis was performed on 4 to 12% Bis-Tris NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen) and transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes according to the manufacturer’s instructions (iBLOT2; Life Technologies). Membranes were blotted with the following primary antibodies: Banf1 (BAF antibody A-11 [Santa Cruz, sc-166324]; 1:500), Irf3 (CST 4302; 1:1,000), cGAS (CST 31659; 1:1,000), Irf1 (CST 8478; 1:1,000), Aim2 (CST 63660; 1:1,000), Ddx41 (CST 15076; 1:1,000), Pqbp1 (Proteintech 16264-1-AP; 1:500), γH2AX (phospho S139) (Abcam, ab26350 [1:5,000] or CST 9718 [1:1,000]), H2AX (CST 2595; 1:1,000), actin (CST 3700; 1:3,000) and STING (CST 13647; 1:1,000). Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit (Pierce, 31460; 1:5,000) or anti-mouse (Sigma, A8924; 1:5,000) IgG was used as a secondary antibody. Protein bands were visualized with chemiluminescence substrate (Thermo Fisher, 34577) and autoradiograph film (MIDSCI).
Gene expression analysis by RT-qPCR.
For RT-qPCR, total RNA was extracted from 2 to 5 × 104 cells using an RNeasy 96 kit (Qiagen) and eluted in 100 μl of water. Real time PCR was performed on a Quantstudio 6 real-time PCR machine (Applied Biosystyem) in a 20-μl reaction consisting of 9 μl of total RNA, 10 μl of 2× master mix (TaqMan RNA-to-Ct 1-step kit; Applied Biosystems), 900 nM concentrations of each primer, and a 250 nM concentration of the probe. The primers and probes were synthesized by IDT, and the sequences are listed in Table S2B. Mouse β-actin (NM_007393) was used as a comparison reference (IDT assay ID Mm.PT.39a.22214843.g).
RNA-Seq, ultra-low-input ChIP-Seq, and data processing.
For RNA-Seq, total RNA from 106 control BV2 cells, Banf1 gene-edited cells, and Banf1-complemented cells were extracted using RNeasy minikit (Qiagen). The quality of the RNA samples was evaluated using Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent). Libraries were sequenced on Illumina HiSeq2500 platforms (Genome Technology Access Center, Washington University). The reads were aligned to the mm9 build using Bowtie2 to map clean reads to reference genes. RPKM values were determined using STAR aligner.
Ultralow Input ChIP-Seq was performed as described previously. Briefly, aliquots of 105 cells were suspended in 20 μl of EZ nuclei isolation buffer (Sigma) and digested using 20 μl of MNase (NEB MNase buffer, 1 μl of MNase, and 3 mM dithiothreitol) for 5 min at 37°C, which was quenched by adding 4.4 μl of 100 mM EDTA and 4.4 μl of 1% Triton X-100 and 1% deoxycholate. Digested nucleosomes were diluted in complete ChIP buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8.0], 2 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 5 mM sodium butyrate, and protease inhibitors [Roche]), precleared using Dynabeads (Invitrogen) for 1 h at 4°C, and subjected to immunoprecipitation overnight at 4°C (0.1 μg of H3K27ac; Abcam, ab4729). Bead chromatin complexes were washed sequentially using low-salt buffer (0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 150 mM NaCl) and high-salt buffer (0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris [pH 8.0,] 500 mM NaCl) and then eluted with 1% SDS and 100 mM NaHCO3 for 1 h at 65°C. DNA was purified using Maxtract tubes (Qiagen) and precipitated overnight. For ATAC-Seq, aliquots of 5 × 104 cells were processed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Nextera DNA library preparation kit; Illumina).
Deep sequencing was performed on an Illumina HiSeq2500 1 × 50 (Genome Technology Access Center, Washington University). After demultiplexing, files were processed for alignment, peak calling, RPKM normalization, and visualization using NovaAlign, Macs2, DeepTool’s BamCoverage, and the UCSC Genome Browser, respectively. The R packages ChIPpeakAnno and ggplot2 were used to assign H3K27 acetylation peaks to closest genes and plotting. Raw and processed data are available on the GEO database (GSE141386).
Immunofluorescence microscopy.
For γH2AX staining, MEFs were seeded onto microscope coverslips and fixed for 25 min with 3.2% PFA in 1× phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The cells then were washed extensively with IF wash buffer (1× PBS, 0.5% NP-40, 0.02% NaN3) and blocked with IF blocking buffer (IF wash buffer plus 10% FBS) for at least 30 min. Cells were incubated with mouse anti-pH2A.X antibody (Abcam, 26350; 1:1,000 in IF blocking buffer) for 1 h at 4°C. Cells were washed three times with IF washing buffer and then stained with secondary antibody (1:1,000; goat anti-mouse conjugated with Alexa Fluor 594; Invitrogen, catalog no. A11032) and Hoechst (1:5,000; BD Biosciences 33342) diluted in IF blocking buffer for 1 h at 4°C. Coverslips were rinsed extensively and then mounted using Prolong Gold mounting medium (Invitrogen, catalog no. P36930). Epifluorescence microscopy was performed on an Olympus fluorescence microscope (BX-53) using an UPlanS-Apo 60×/1.35 oil immersion lens with immersion oil from Millipore (104699). Images were obtained at room temperature using an ORCA-Flash4.0 LT digital camera (Hamamatsu, catalog no. C11440) and cellSens Dimension software. All images on the same channel were acquired using the same exposure time, and no digital gain was applied during image capture. Raw images were exported into Adobe Photoshop, and for any adjustments in image contrast or brightness, the levels function was applied. For focus quantitation, at least 100 cells were analyzed in triplicate.
For cytoplasmic double-stranded DNA staining, 8,000 BV2 cells in 250 μl of DMEM media were seeded into wells of a chamber slide (Nunc, Lab-Tek II) and cultured for 2 days. Cells were stained with MitoTracker Deep Red FM (Thermo Fisher, catalog no. M22426; 1 μM) in Opti-MEM at 37°C for 30 min, and then fixed with 4% PFA in PBS for 20 min at room temperature. Cells were washed with PBS and blocked with IFA buffer (0.1% saponin and 5% goat serum in PBS) for 10 min at room temperature. Cells then were stained with primary antibody (Santa Cruz, double-stranded DNA marker antibody [HYB331-01], sc-58749, diluted 1:100 in IFA buffer) at 4°C for 24 h. After washing with PBS and blocking with IFA buffer at room temperature for 10 min, the cells were incubated with a secondary antibody (Thermo Fisher, goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488, catalog no. A11029; 1:250 in IFA) at room temperature for 1 h. After washing and staining with DAPI (4′,6′-diamidino-2-phenylindole; 1:500 in IFA buffer), cells were mounted with Prolong Gold mounting medium (Invitrogen, catalog no. P36930). Confocal microscopy was performed on a Zeiss LSM 880 confocal microscope using a Plan-Apochromat 63×/1.4 oil immersion lens (Zeiss). Images in each experiment were acquired at identical settings (detector gain of 590 and 600 for DAPI and Alexa Fluor 488, respectively; zoom, 1.5× for each). Images were analyzed with Volocity software (Quorum Technologies).
Confocal microscopy imaging of mitochondria in live cells.
For live cell imaging, cells were grown in four-chamber glass-bottom dishes (D35C4-20-1.5-N; Cellvis). Cells were loaded with MitoTracker Green FM (200 nM; Thermo Fisher) together with Image-iT TMRM reagent (1:1,000; Thermo Fisher) in Live Cell Imaging Solution (Thermo Fisher, catalog no. A14291DJ) at 37°C for 30 min. Cells then were washed three times and imaged in live cell imaging solution at 37°C and 5% CO2. The cells were analyzed using Zeiss LSM 880 Airyscan confocal microscope (objective Plan-Apochromat 63×/1.4 oil; Zeiss) equipped with a Pecon stage-top incubator with controlled temperature and CO2. Images in each experiment were acquired at identical settings (Ex/Em 561/606, detection wavelength of 571 to 641, detector gain 646.2 for TMRM; Ex/Em 488/530, detection wavelength of 499 to 561, detector gain 837.0 for MitoTracker Green FM).
Analysis of mitochondrial membrane potential by flow cytometry.
Cells were loaded with Image-iT TMRM reagent (1:1,000; catalog no. I34361; Thermo Fisher) in complete culture medium at 37°C for 30 min. The cells were then washed three times with PBS and resuspended in PBS. Analysis of the stained cells was carried out using Canto II flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson), and data were analyzed with FlowJo v10.6.1 software (Tree Star).
Quantification of cytosolic DNA.
The method to isolate cytosolic DNA is modified from a published paper. Briefly, 106 BV2 cells were placed in individual wells of a six-well plate and cultured at 37°C for 16 h. The cells were washed once with PBS and lysed by adding 100 μl of 1% NP-40. Lysates were scraped and gathered in a 1.5-ml tube and incubated on ice for 15 min. Lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 15 min at 4°C, and the supernatant and cell pellets were separated. The supernatant was subjected to DNA extraction with the DNeasy blood and tissue kit (Qiagen). The pellet was lysed with 180 μl of ALT buffer (DNeasy blood and tissue kit; Qiagen) and 20 μl of proteinase K, followed by incubation at 56°C for 10 min. DNA was extracted according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For both supernatants and pellets, DNA was eluted with 100 μl of AE (Tris-HCl-EDTA) elution buffer. The DNA was diluted 50× to load 7 μl per qPCR (SYBR green; KAPA HiFi HotStart). The abundance of a nuclear 18S gene (forward primer, 5′-TAGAGGGACAAGTGGCGTTC-3′; reverse primer, 5′-CGCTGAGCCAGTCAGTGT-3′) and a mitochondrial gene, Cox1 (mt-Cox1_F, TCGGAGCCCCAGATATAGCATT; mt-Cox1_R, CTGCTCCTGCTTCTACTATTGATG), was measured. The cytoplasmic DNA level was expressed as a ratio to those in the pellet.
Statistical analysis.
Data from at least three independent experiments were pooled and subjected to a normality test prior to significance test. Nonnormal distribution data were log transformed. Significance was tested by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), with Dunnett’s posttest; two-way ANOVA, with Tukey’s posttest; or unpaired two-tailed t test. Data were analyzed using Prism version 8 (GraphPad). Statistical significance was assigned when P values were <0.05.
This article is a direct contribution from Michael S. Diamond, a Fellow of the American Academy of Microbiology, who arranged for and secured reviews by Ana Fernandez-Sesma, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, and John Schoggins, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center.
Citation Ma H, Qian W, Bambouskova M, Collins PL, Porter SI, Byrum AK, Zhang R, Artyomov M, Oltz EM, Mosammaparast N, Miner JJ, Diamond MS. 2020. Barrier-to-autointegration factor 1 protects against a basal cGAS-STING response. mBio 11:e00136-20. https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00136-20.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PMID 31209294 — Myc and Dnmt1 impede the pluripotent to totipotent state transition in embryonic stem cells.
Nature cell biology (2019) · https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31209294/

Myc and Dnmt1 impede the pluripotent to totipotent state transition in embryonic stem cells
Totipotency refers to the ability of a cell to generate all of the cell types of an organism. Unlike pluripotency, the establishment of totipotency is poorly understood. In mouse embryonic stem cells, Dux drives a small percentage of cells into a totipotent state by expressing 2-cell-embryo-specific transcripts. To understand how this transition takes place, we performed single-cell RNA-seq, which revealed a two-step transcriptional reprogramming process characterized by downregulation of pluripotent genes in the first step and upregulation of the 2-cell-embryo-specific elements in the second step. To identify factors controlling the transition, we performed a CRISPR–Cas9-mediated screen, which revealed Myc and Dnmt1 as two factors preventing the transition. Mechanistic studies demonstrate that Myc prevents downregulation of pluripotent genes in the first step, while Dnmt1 impedes 2-cell-embryo-specific gene activation in the second step. Collectively, the findings of our study reveal insights into the establishment and regulation of the totipotent state in mouse embryonic stem cells.
Following fertilization, the mouse genome starts to be activated at late 1-cell and 2-cell stages. This process is known as zygotic genome activation, and coincides with a gain of totipotency, the ability of a cell to generate embryonic and extraembryonic cell types. Interestingly, a group of genes (for example, Zscan4 genes) and repeats (for example, MERVL repeats) are transiently activated at this stage, suggesting their role in establishing totipotency. However, the molecular features of totipotency remained elusive partly due to the scarcity of mammalian embryos.
The mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) derived or cultured under modified conditions exhibit totipotent-like developmental potential, but these cells are transcriptionally distinct from 2-cell embryos. Interestingly, in serum/leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) culture conditions, <1% of mESCs exhibit several features of 2-cell embryos, including expression of 2-cell-embryo-specific transcripts, downregulation of pluripotency genes, increased histone mobility, dispersed chromocentres and increased developmental capacity. This spontaneous 2-cell-like (2C-like) state is reversible, and nearly all mESCs are capable of cycling between ESC and 2C-like states. Compared with 2-cell embryos, which are difficult to obtain in large numbers, 2C-like cells can be readily isolated from ESCs, making them a good model for understanding totipotency and zygotic genome activation. While several factors, such as Tet proteins, were reported to regulate the formation of 2C-like cells, a detailed mechanistic understanding of the 2C-like transition is still lacking, partially due to the low frequency of 2C-like cells in mESCs. The demonstration that Dux can drive the ESC to 2C-like cell transition makes the generation of 2C-like cells much easier. In this study, we examine the transcriptional dynamics of the 2C-like transition using Dux and identify factors mediating the transition process.
Results
Establishment and verification of a Dux-mediated ESC to 2C-like transition system.
We constructed an ESC line containing a MERVL-promoter-driven tdTomato transgene (an indicator of the 2C-like state) and a doxycycline-inducible Dux transgene (Fig. 1a). Dux expression induces the 2C-like transition (Supplementary Fig. 1a). Depending on the ESC clones, the 2C-like transition rates varied between 10 and 55%, which is comparable to previous reports. The 2C-like transition rate is regulated by the exogenous Dux level as the clones with higher Dux expression exhibited a higher rate of 2C-like transition (Supplementary Fig. 1b,c). The fact that not all cells became 2C-like cells after Dux induction suggests cell-to-cell heterogeneity (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 1a).
To characterize the transcriptomic change of the Dux-induced 2C-like transition, we performed RNA-seq analysis of three cell populations: a 2C-negative population collected before Dux-induction (D0 2C−), and 2C-negative and 2C-positive populations collected after 1 d Dux induction (D1 2C− and D1 2C+) (Fig. 1b).
By comparing the transcriptome of ESCs (D0 2C−)to that of 2C-like cells (D1 2C+), we identified 2,976 upregulated and 2,726 downregulated genes/repeats in 2C-like cells (fold change (FC) > 2, false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.001; Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 1). The 2C+-upregulated genes/repeats include 2-cell-embryo-specific transcripts such as MERVL repeats, Zscan4 genes, Spz1 and Zfp352 (Fig. 1c) and are involved in chromatin and nucleosome assembly (Supplementary Fig. 1d). The downregulated genes include pluripotency-related genes such as Sox2, Klf4 and Rest (Fig. 1c) and are involved in organic anion transport and development (Supplementary Fig. 1d). Analysis of published Dux chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) data in mESCs indicated that many of the genes upregulated in 2C+ cells are direct targets of Dux (Fig. 1d). Notably, the transcription start sites (TSSs) of upregulated genes are significantly closer to MERVL repeats than those with unchanged or downregulated genes (Supplementary Fig. 1e). This indicates that 2C+-upregulated genes could be activated by nearby MERVL repeats, which is similar to that observed in spontaneous 2C-like cells.
Importantly, the transcriptome and expression pattern of 2-cell-embryo-specific elements (D1 2C+ cells) are highly similar to those of spontaneous 2C-like cells (Pearson r=0.91, Fig. 1e; Pearson r=0.9, Supplementary Fig. 1f). In addition, the apoptosis-related genes that are induced by Dux in C2C12 are not increased in D1 2C+ cells (Supplementary Table l). Furthermore, similarly to spontaneous 2C-like cells, Dux-induced 2C-like cells can exit the 2C-like state spontaneously (Supplementary Fig. 1g,h). Taken together, these results suggest that we established a 2C-like transition system that resembles the spontaneous 2C-like transition.
Dux-induced ESC to 2C-like cell transition involves an intermediate state.
Since Dux did not induce a complete 2C-like transition (Fig. 1b), we characterized the molecular features of D1 2C− cells by comparing their transcriptome to those of other cell populations (D0 2C− and D1 2C+). Despite a negative tdTomato signal, D1 2C− cells displayed a partial change in many of the 2C+ up/downregulated elements. The genes/repeats whose expression levels are altered in both D1 2C− and D1 2C+ cells are designated as ‘group 1’ elements (Supplementary Table 2 and Fig. 1f). In group 1, the downregulated genes are enriched for terms of embryonic development and signalling pathways important for pluripotency (Fig. 1f), while the upregulated genes are enriched for terms of RNA modification and protein unfolding (Fig. 1f). Interestingly, another group of genes/repeats (group 2 elements) are significantly altered only in D1 2C+ cells (Fig. 1f and Supplementary Table 2), with the downregulated genes involved in mECS pluripotency, and upregulated genes involved in cellular assembly and organization. Most of the activated repeats belong to the late-altered group 2 elements (Supplementary Fig. 1i), which is consistent with activation of the MERVL reporter in D1 2C+ cells. Taken together, D1 2C− cells exhibited an intermediate-state transcriptome different from the starting ESCs (Supplementary Fig. 1j).
The distinct expression patterns of group 1 and group 2 elements imply that transcriptional reprogramming during the pluripotent to 2C-like transition may follow a sequential order. Group 1 elements might be changed first followed by the alteration of group 2 elements. Consistent with this notion, a majority of Dux-bound 2C+-upregulated genes belong to group 1 genes, while group 2 genes dominate the 2C+-upregulated genes (Supplementary Fig. 1k), suggesting that Dux-bound genes get activated first during the transition.
Single-cell RNA-seq analysis confirmed the existence of an intermediate state.
To further confirm the intermediate state during the transition, we performed single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) at different time points of Dux induction (Fig. 2a). Consistent with the timing of tdTomato reporter activation (Supplementary Fig. 1a), MERVL and Zscan4 are activated in many cells only after 1 d Dux induction (Supplementary Fig. 2a).
Due to cellular heterogeneity, we pooled all of the cells to perform clustering analysis, which revealed three major cell clusters (Fig. 2b–d). Cluster 3 appears to be 2C-like cells with expression of Zscan4 and MERVL (Fig. 2b–d and Supplementary Fig. 2b). Cluster 1 represents ESCs as they express pluripotency genes such as Sox2 and Pou5f1, but not MERVL and Zscan4 (Fig. 2b–d). Cluster 2 represents an intermediate cell population as they showed a reduced expression of pluripotency genes such as Sox2 and Pou5f1, and also a partial expression of 2-cell-embryo-specific transcripts such as MERVL and Gm5662 (Fig. 2b–d and Supplementary Fig. 2b). Interestingly, Nanog messenger RNA is not decreased during the transition (Fig. 2c).
Previous single-cell studies identified a minor formative-state pluripotent population in mESCs. We identified a similar minor population (Supplementary Fig. 2c), with low expression of Zfp42, Klf4, and Nanog, but high expression of Pou3f1, Dnmt3b, and Krt18 compared to that of the major pluripotent cells (Supplementary Fig. 2d). Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis confirmed the existence of this minor population in mESCs (Supplementary Fig. 2e). Identification of this minor formative state in mESC validates our scRNA-seq approach.
To determine the relationship between the single-cell populations and the bulk RNA-seq stages (Fig. 1b), we performed clustering and principal component analysis (PCA). Indeed, the transcriptional profiles of the three cell clusters respectively correlate with D0 2C−, D1 2C− and D1 2C+ cell populations (Fig. 2e). Thus, scRNA-seq data can be used to analyse the transcriptional dynamics during the 2C-like transition. Consistently, analysis of the distribution of the different cell clusters at each time point revealed that the Dux-induced 2C-like transition is recapitulated by scRNA-seq (Fig. 2f and Supplementary Fig. 2f). Taking these findings together, we conclude that scRNA-seq revealed an intermediate cell state during the 2C-like transition. Notably, although D1 2C− cells consisted of ~66% cluster 1 cells (Fig. 2f), activation of 2C+-upregulated elements in D1 2C− cells (Fig. 1f) dominated the transcriptional variance in PCA analysis leading to a higher correlation of D1 2C− cells with cluster 2 cells rather than cluster 1 cells (Supplementary Fig. 2g).
scRNA-seq confirmed a two-step transcriptional reprogramming of the ESC to 2C-like cell transition.
The identification of an intermediate state indicates that the 2C-like transition follows a step-wise pattern. To dissect the transcriptional dynamics during the 2C-like transition, we performed pseudo-time analysis (Fig. 2g). The projected timeline recapitulated the 2C-like transition as it captured the progressive activation of 2C-like-cell markers such as Zscan4d (Fig. 2g). The pseudo-time indicates that cluster 1 (pluripotent ESCs) cells are mainly at the beginning of the projected timeline trajectory. Cluster 2 cells are mainly located in the middle of the timeline, whereas cluster 3 (2C-like) cells are at the end of the timeline (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Fig. 3a). The distribution of cells from different time points along the pseudo-time also captures the Dux-induced 2C-like transition (Supplementary Fig. 3b), supporting the validity of the projected timeline. In addition, many group 1 genes, including Zscan4d, Dppa2 and Chd5, are altered in cluster 2 cells, while group 2 genes, such as Slc35e3, Fbxo34 and Socs2, tend to be altered in cluster 3 cells, further supporting the validity of the analysis (Supplementary Fig. 3c). Together, the findings of the scRNA-seq analysis provided a transcriptomic roadmap for the 2C-like transition.
Bulk RNA-seq revealed that the 2C-like transition involved the downregulation of pluripotency genes and the expression of 2-cell-embryo-specific elements (Fig. 1c). To dissect the temporal dynamics of these alterations, we analysed the expression pattern of these elements in scRNA-seq. We found that downregulation of pluripotency-related genes has already occurred in the intermediate state, while the activation of 2-cell-specific elements was not evident until the 2C-like state (Fig. 2h and Supplementary Fig. 3d,e). Notably, bulk RNA-seq based on the MERVL reporter cannot distinguish intermediate cells from pluripotent cells, and thus failed to reveal the temporal order of downregulation of pluripotent genes and upregulation of 2-cell-specific elements during the 2C-like transition (Fig. 1f). Collectively, our results support that the pluripotent to totipotent state transition is achieved in two steps: the pluripotent to intermediate state, characterized by downregulation of pluripotency genes; and the intermediate to 2C-like cell state, characterized by the activation of 2-cell-embryo-specific genes and repeats.
Identification of regulators for the ESC to 2C-like cell transition by CRISPR–Cas9 screening.
The incomplete 2C-like transition after Dux induction indicates the existence of barriers preventing the transition. To identify these barriers, we performed a screen utilizing a previously reported CRISPR–Cas9 library. After 1 d Dux induction, 2C+ and 2C− cells were sorted for sequencing to determine the relative single guide RNA (sgRNA) enrichment. The sgRNA of positive regulators will be depleted from the 2C+ population, and vice versa (Fig. 3a). As a control for experimental variation, two independent screens were performed and gene enrichment/depletion was ranked using the MAGeCK package.
The screen identified reproducible negative regulators (positive robust rank aggregation score <0.01; Supplementary Table 4), including Dnmt1, Uhrf1, Ptpn11, Dicer1, Smad7, Myc and Tsc2 (Fig. 3b, green dots, Supplementary Fig. 4a) and reproducible positive regulators (negative robust rank aggregation score <0.01; Supplementary Table 4) of the 2C-like-state transition, such as Eif3h, Eif5b and Eif4e2 (Fig. 3b, orange dots, Supplementary Fig. 4b). To identify potential pathways regulating the 2C-like transition, we performed a protein interaction analysis on reproducible hits and identified multiple networks for negative regulators, including Dnmt1/Uhrf1 for DNA methylation, Grb2/Ptpn11/Sos1 of the MAPK signalling pathway and Tsc1/Tsc2 of the TOR signalling pathway (Fig. 3c), supporting the validity of the screen. This analysis also identified Eif3h/Eif5b/Eif4e2 involved in translation as a network of positive regulators (Fig. 3c).
To validate the roles of these identified regulators in the 2C-like-state transition, we picked 11 candidate regulators based on the interaction analysis. For each candidate, we performed CRISPR gene perturbation and quantified 2C-like cells after Dux induction. Perturbation of all ten negative candidates increased 2C-like cells, while perturbation of Eif3h reduced 2C-like cells (Fig. 3d). These results further validate our screen results. Since our study focuses on transcriptional regulation of the 2C-like transition, we focus on Myc and Dnmt1 to understand how they negatively regulate the transition process.
Myc prevents gene downregulation during the ESC to intermediate-state transition.
Myc is a transcription factor critical for the pluripotent transcriptome. Interestingly, the 2C-like transition involves transcriptomic reprogramming (Fig. 1c) and Myc is one of the top candidates regulating the transition (Fig. 3b). To understand how Myc regulates this process, we designed two sgRNAs targeting Myc and confirmed their efficiency (Supplementary Fig. 5a). Myc depletion increased the 2C-like cells in three different ESC clones on Dux induction (Fig. 4a). Notably, sgMyc exhibited no effect on 2C-like-state maintenance (Supplementary Fig. 5b), indicating that Myc deficiency increased 2C-like cells by facilitating the 2C-like transition. The effect of Myc on the 2C-like transition is independent of Dux expression, as Myc depletion did not alter Dux expression (Fig. 4b). In addition, Myc deficiency facilitated the spontaneous 2C-like transition (Supplementary Fig. 5c), indicating that the effect of Myc on the transition is not dependent on the Dux transgene.
Myc maintains the pluripotent transcriptome by amplifying the transcription of a large set of genes (Supplementary Fig. 5d). As the ESC transcriptome is reprogrammed during the 2C-like transition, we asked whether Myc impedes the transition by preventing transcriptional reprogramming. To this end, we focused on the direct Myc targets in ESCs and found that 33.7% of 2C+-downregulated genes are Myc targets (Fig. 4c). In contrast, only 10.7% of 2C+-upregulated genes are Myc targets (Fig. 4c), suggesting that Myc mainly antagonizes gene downregulation during the transition. Indeed, Myc-bound 2C+-downregulated genes were further decreased in Myc-depleted cells after Dux induction, while the expression of Myc-bound 2C+-upregulated genes was not affected (Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 5), indicating that Myc inhibits the 2C-like transition by preferably maintaining the expression of 2C+-downregulated genes in ESCs.
Transcriptome analysis revealed that downregulation of pluripotency genes mainly occurs at the ESC to intermediate-state transition (Fig. 2h). Since Myc amplifies the transcriptional activity of 2C+-downregulated pluripotent genes, we asked whether Myc mainly prevents the ESC to intermediate-state transition. To this end, we analysed the Myc-bound 2C+-downregulated genes (Fig. 4c) and found that the majority of these genes belong to group 1 genes (Fig. 4e). Downregulation of these genes mainly takes place during the ESC to intermediate-state transition (Fig. 4f), suggesting that Myc impedes their downregulation at the early stage of the 2C-like transition. Consistently, Myc deficiency in ESCs has a bigger effect on the 2C-like transition than that in D1 2C−cells, which displayed an intermediate transcriptome (Fig. 4g). Thus, we conclude that Myc mainly impedes the ESC to intermediate-state transition.
Dnmt1 impedes activation of 2C+-upregulated genes during the intermediate to 2C-like cell transition.
Dnmt1 is responsible for maintaining the DNA methylation pattern during cell division. Interestingly, ESCs undergo global DNA demethylation when they enter the 2C-like state, suggesting a potential negative role of DNA methylation in the 2C-like transition. Furthermore, Dnmt1 is identified as a top candidate impeding the 2C-like transition (Fig. 3b). These observations prompted us to investigate the role of Dnmt1 and DNA methylation in the 2C-like transition.
To this end, we designed two sgRNAs targeting Dnmt1 and confirmed their efficiency (Supplementary Fig. 6a). After Dux induction, we found that Dnmt1 deficiency significantly increased the 2C-like-cell population in three ESC clones (Fig. 5a). Notably, sgDnmt1 exhibited no effect on 2C-like-state maintenance, suggesting that Dnmt1 deficiency increases 2C-like cells by facilitating the 2C-like transition (Supplementary Fig. 6b). Dux expression is not altered in Dnmt1-deficient cells (Fig. 5b), indicating that Dnmt1 mediated the 2C-like transition independent of Dux expression. In addition, Dnmt1 deficiency also increased the spontaneous 2C-like transition (Supplementary Fig. 6c), suggesting that the effect of Dnmt1 on the 2C-like transition is independent of the Dux transgene.
The analysis of publicly available DNA methylomes of ESCs and 2C-like cells indicated that the promoters of 2C+-upregulated genes undergo more significant demethylation compared to that of 2C+-downregulated genes in 2C-like cells (Supplementary Fig. 6d). Given that Dnmt1 is critical for maintaining DNA methylation, we hypothesized that Dnmt1-mediated DNA methylation serves as a repressor to prevent gene upregulation during the transition. Indeed, the promoter methylation of 2C+-upregulated genes is more significant than that of 2C+-downregulated genes in mESCs (Fig. 5c). Importantly, Dnmt1 deficiency significantly decreased the promoter methylation of 2C+-upregulated genes (Fig. 5c and Supplementary Table 6), implying that Dnmt1 maintains the promoter methylation of 2C+-upregulated genes in mESCs.
If Dnmt1 functions as a barrier for gene activation during the 2C-like transition, the induction of these genes should be more evident in Dnmt1-deficient cells. Indeed, 2C+-upregulated elements were further activated in Dnmt1-deficient cells (Fig. 5d and Supplementary Table 7), while 2C+-downregulated genes showed no significant increase in Dnmt1-deficient cells (Fig. 5d). Taken together, these results indicate that Dnmt1 preferentially prevents activation of 2C+-upregulated genes during the transition.
Activation of 2C-embryo-specific elements occurs mainly during the intermediate to 2C-like state transition (Fig. 2h). Since Dnmt1 impedes the activation of 2C+-upregulated genes during the transition, it is likely that Dnmt1 prevents the intermediate to 2C-like cell transition.
To test this possibility, we focused on the elements that are further upregulated in Dnmt1-deficient cells after Dux activation (FC > 2 and P value < 0.001) (Fig. 5e and Supplementary Table 7). The majority of these elements belong to 2C+-upregulated genes (Fig. 5e). Interestingly, these Dnmt1-repressed 2C+-upregulated elements mostly belong to group 2 (Fig. 5f). scRNA-seq revealed that activation of these genes/repeats mainly takes place during the intermediate to 2C-like cell transition (Fig. 5g), suggesting that Dnmt1 majorly impedes the transition at this stage. Furthermore, in contrast to Myc, depletion of Dnmt1 caused a more evident increase in the 2C-like population in D1 2C− cells than in ESCs (Fig. 5h). Collectively, these data support that Dnmt1 serves as a barrier mainly during the intermediate to 2C-like cell transition.
Since Myc and Dnmt1 prevent the 2C-like transition at different stages, we anticipate that removal of both barriers should have an additive effect. Indeed, ESCs infected with Dnmt1 and Myc sgRNAs exhibited a further increase in the 2C-like transition on Dux induction compared to that of single sgRNA infection (Fig. 6a), supporting the finding that Myc and Dnmt1 function independently during the transition.
Discussion
The spontaneous 2C-like transition is induced by Dux. It is believed that Dppa2/4 activate Dux in mESCs to initiate the 2C-like transition. However, the mechanisms underlying the transcriptomic dynamics during the transition after Dux activation remained elusive. To fill in this knowledge gap, we performed scRNA-seq and CRISPR–Cas9-mediated screening to dissect the transcriptional dynamics and identify relevant regulators.
Unlike previous studies, our study exploited Dux to drive the transition, and revealed two stages of reprogramming during the transition: an early stage characterized by the downregulation of pluripotent genes and a late stage characterized by the activation of 2-cell-embryo-specific elements (Fig. 6b). This dynamic process indicates that activation of 2-cell-embryo-specific genes/repeats may require the cells to exit the pluripotent state first. Notably, prolonged Dux induction did not induce a complete 2C-like transition as Dux induction initiates an unsynchronized 2C-like transition and cannot maintain the 2C-like state (Supplementary Fig. 6e).
A recent study of the 2C-like transition identified a Zscan4+ intermediate state by analysing the expression of 93 genes. The expression dynamics of these genes are similar to that of our scRNA-seq (Supplementary Table 3). Importantly, on the basis of unbiased scRNA-seq of the Dux-induced 2C-like transition, we were able to dissect the transcriptional dynamics of the 2C-like transition and identify an unappreciated intermediate state. Since the intermediate-state cells are rare (<5%, Fig. 2f) and cannot be isolated by analysing a limited number of mESCs harbouring MERVL or Zscan4 reporter, they were not identified in the previous studies (Supplementary Fig. 6f,g).
Previously reported factors that inhibit the 2C-like transition, such as CAF1, mainly affect the transition through repressing Dux. However, factors that mediate the transition after Dux activation are largely unknown. To fill in this knowledge gap, we performed a CRISPR–Cas9 screen under Dux-induction conditions and revealed functionally diverse candidates, including Myc and Dnmt1. Importantly, we demonstrated that Myc impedes the early stage of the 2C-like transition through its transcriptional amplification on 2C+-downregulated genes, while Dnmt1 impedes the activation of 2C+-upregulated genes (Fig. 6b). Notably, Myc and Dnmt1 exhibit unimodal expression in mESCs (Supplementary Fig. 6h,i). Thus, the incomplete 2C-like transition following Dux expression is unlikely to be due to the expression heterogeneity of Myc and Dnmt1 in mESCs.
In conclusion, our study not only reveals a two-stage transcriptional reprogramming process during the 2C-like transition, but also suggests that the regulatory network governing the transition may involve several distinct machineries that can be explored in the future.
Methods
ESC culture and establishment of cell lines with inducible Dux expression.
The ES-E14 cells were cultured on 0.1% gelatin-coated plates with standard LIF/serum medium containing 15% FBS (Sigma, cat. no. F6178), 1,000 U ml−1 mouse LIF (Millipore, cat. no. ESG1107), 0.1 mM non-essential amino acids (Gibco, cat. no. 11140), 0.055 mM β-mercaptoethanol (Gibco, cat. no. 21985023), 2 mM GlutaMAX (Gibco, cat. no. 35050), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Gibco, cat. no. 11360) and penicillin/streptomycin (100 U ml−1) (Gibco, cat. no. 15140). For culture of ESC lines, the medium was changed daily, and cells were routinely passaged every other day. The transcriptome of our mESCs is highly similar to that of a published ES-E14 dataset (Pearson correlation, r = 0.92). The E14 cell line was kindly provided by the laboratory of B. Koller. The MERV-L-LTR-tdTomato reporter constructs were kindly provided by the laboratory of S. L. Pfaff and were linearized and transfected into E14 cells by electroporation. Colonies containing tdTomato-positive cells were then picked and expanded. The Dux sequence was codon-optimized, synthesized by IDT and inserted into pCW57-MCS1-P2A-MCS2 (Neo) (Addgene 89180). ESCs with the 2C::tdTomato reporter were infected with a plasmid expressing Dux and selected with neomycin for one week. Single clones were picked for further experiments. To ensure that Dux-induced 2C-like cells resemble the spontaneous 2C-like cells and to avoid potential side effects of Dux overexpression, we choose clone 8 for bulk RNA-seq as the Dux induction level in this clone is comparable to the Dux level in spontaneous 2C-like cells (~100-fold, Supplementary Fig. 1c). The sequence of codon-optimized Dux was included in Supplementary Table 8.
FACS.
Flow cytometry analysis was performed using the BD FACSCanto II, and cell sorting was performed on the BD FACSAria II cell sorter. Data and images were analysed and generated using Flowjo (V10) software. The gating strategy was shown in FACS figures. The following antibodies were used in FACS: Myc (1:50, Proteintech, 10828–1-AP, lot number 00060703), Dnmt1 (1:50, Cell Signaling, 5032T, D63A6, lot number 1), Rex1 (1:200, Novus, NBP2–37357, 5E11A6, lot number 130125), donkey anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) highly cross-adsorbed secondary antibody, Alexa Fluor 488 (1:250, Invitrogen, A-21206, lot number 1275888) and donkey anti-mouse IgG (H+L) highly cross-adsorbed secondary antibody, Alexa Fluor 488 (1:250, Invitrogen, A-21202, lot number 1259373).
RNA isolation, qPCR and bulk RNA-seq.
Cellular RNA was collected using the Qiagen Allprep RNA/DNA mini kit (Qiagen, cat. no. 80204). Complementary DNA was generated using the SuperScrip III First-Strand Synthesis System (Thermofisher, cat. no. 18080051) and qRT-PCR was performed using the Fast SYBR Green Master Mix (Thermofisher, cat. no. 4385612). Relative quantification was performed using the comparative CT method with normalization to GAPDH. The bulk RNA-seq library was prepared using the NEBNext Ultra Directional RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina (NEB, cat. no. E7420S).
CRISPR–Cas9 knockdown and genome-wide CRISPR screening.
The gene knockdown by CRISPR–Cas9 was performed as described before. The sgRNA sequences were included in Supplementary Table 8.
The mouse CRISPR–Cas9 library based on the lentiCRISPRv2 backbone was a gift from D. Root and J. Doench (Addgene no. 73633), containing 78,637 gRNAs targeting 19,674 genes. The plasmid DNA library was amplified according to recommended protocol (http://www.addgene.org/pooled-library/broadgpp-mouse-knockout-brie/). Lentivirus was produced using the psPAX2-PMD2.G system in 293T cells and titred. To construct the ESC library, a total of ~40 million ESCs with the MERVL reporter and Dux transgene were transduced with lentivirus for 48 h in the presence of 4 μg ml−1 Polybrene to reach an infection efficiency of ~15%. After 2 d infection, cells were cultured in medium containing 1 μg ml−1 puromycin for another 8 d to select for infected cells. For the screen, ~30 million puromycin-selected cells were treated with 2 μg ml−1 doxycycline for 1 d to induce Dux expression and the 2C-like transition in the culture. Around 1 million 2C-positive cells and 10 million 2C-negative cells were then collected through FACS based on tdTomato reporter expression. Genomic DNA of 2C-positive and -negative cells was extracted through the Qiagen DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (cat. no. 69504). Guide RNA sequences were then amplified using P5 primer (5′-AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACAC TCTTT CCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCTTTGTGGAAAGGACGAAACACC G-3′) and P7 primer (5′-CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATNNNNNNNNGT GACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCTCCAATTCCCACTCCTTTCA AGACCT-3′; NNNNNNNN refers to a 8-base-pair (bp) index) through KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix (cat. no. KK2602). For each sample, four parallel PCR reactions were set up, and mixed products from four reactions were then purified through AMPure XP reagents (1.0×) and sequenced by an Illumina HiSeq 2500 Sequencer. The designed CRISPR–Cas9 library expressed 79,632 gRNAs targeting 19,674 genes. Two screen replicates (independent Dux induction and FACS isolation) were performed. The sequencing results were analysed by the MAGeCK package, which took into consideration the magnitude of enrichment/depletion and the consistency of multiple sgRNAs targeting the same gene, to rank positive/negative regulators.
Drop-seq.
Drop-seq was performed as described previously. ESCs with the MERVL reporter and synDux were induced with doxycycline for the designated time and collected for Drop-seq.
Genomic annotation file preparation.
The gtf file corresponding to the mm10 Ensemble GRCm38.85 transcriptome was downloaded from the Ensemble database. The sequences of the synthetic-Dux and TdTomato were added to the mm10 genomic annotation file. The gtf files were converted to refFlat format using the UCSC gtfToGenePred tool (http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/admin/exe/linux.x86_64/gtfToGenePred), and then the refFlat file was converted to a format compatible with the Drop-seq tool (v1.13) using a custom script.
Repeat pseudo-genome preparation.
As repeat elements tend to have multiple highly similar copies along the genome, it is relatively complex to accurately align them and estimate their expression. Hence, we created a repeat pseudo-genome. We used a slightly modified version of the RepEnrich (v0.l) software. Briefly, for each repetitive element subfamily, a pseudo-chromosome was created by concatenating all genomic instances of that subfamily along with their flanking genomics 15 bp sequences and a 200 bp spacer sequence (a sequence of Ns). The pseudo-genome was then indexed using STAR (v.2.5.2b) and the corresponding gtf and refFlat files were created using custom scripts and by considering each pseudo-chromosome as one gene.
Sequencing alignment for coding genes.
Raw reads were first trimmed using Trimmomatic (v.0.36). Illumina sequence adaptors were removed, the leading and tailing low-quality base pairs (fewer than 3) were trimmed, and a 4-bp sliding window was used to scan the reads and trim when the window mean quality dropped below 15. Only reads having at least 50-bp were kept. The resulting reads were mapped to the mm10 genome using STAR (v.2.5.2b) with the following parameters: -outSAMtype BAM SortedByCoordinate – outSAMunmapped Within –outFilterType BySJout -outSAMattributes NH HI AS NM MD -outFilterMultimapNmax 20 -outFilterMismatchNmax 999 -quantMode TranscriptomeSAM GeneCounts. The generated gene expression count files generated by STAR were then used for estimating gene expression.
Sequencing alignment for repeats.
Multi-mapped reads and reads mapping to intronic or intergenic regions were extracted and then mapped to the repeat pseudo-genome. First, the TagReadWithGeneExon command of the dropseq tools (v1.13) was used to tag the reads into utr, coding, intergenic and intronic reads using the bam tag ‘XF’. Multi-mapped reads, intergenic and intronic reads were extracted and mapped to the repeat pseudo-genome using STAR. The STAR read counts were used as an estimate of repeat expression.
Bulk RNA-seq normalization.
For each sample, the gene and repeat expression matrices were merged together and then the ‘Trimmed Mean of M values’ normalization (TMM) method from the R/Bioconductor package edgeR package (v3.24.0) was used to calculate the normalized expression.
Differential gene expression analysis of bulk RNA-seq data.
The R/Bioconductor edgeR package (v3.24.0) was used to detect the differentially expressed genes between the different samples using the generalized linear model-based method. Genes showing more than twofold expression change and an FDR < 0.0001 were considered as differentially expressed.
Functional enrichment analysis.
The functional enrichment analysis was performed by using IPA QIAGEN Inc., https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuity-pathway-analysis/(v01–13). The associated GO and pathway enrichment plots were generated using the ggplot2 package (v3.1.0).
Drop-seq expression matrix generation and pre-processing.
For gene expression quantification in Drop-seq, the raw Drop-seq data were processed using dropseq tools (v1.13). Reads were mapped against the mm10 genome (GRCm38) and the Ensemble GRCm38.85 transcriptome was used for gene annotation. Initially, the gene expression of the top 2,000 abundant cell barcodes was generated (DigitalExpression command of dropseq tools with the option NUM_CORE_BARCODES=2000). To estimate the repeat expression, the bam tag ‘XF’ added by the dropseq tools’ TagReadWithGeneExon was used to extract non-mapped reads and reads mapping to intronic and intergenic regions. The extracted reads were mapped to the repeat pseudo-genome using dropseq tools. The expression matrix of the top 2,000 enriched cell barcodes was generated. For each time point, the expression matrix of the cell barcodes detected in both the reads and genes was generated. The Seurat R package (v2.3.0) was then used to load and pool all of the dataset together. We filtered out cells with <800 detected transcripts and cells in which the mitochondrial transcriptome occupies >10% of the total transcripts. Genes expressed in fewer than three cells were excluded.
Drop-seq normalization.
Due to the sparsity of the Drop-seq data and the contribution of Dux-induced genes to most of the reads, a normal read depth normalization will lead to the shrinkage of the expression of many genes. Hence, we used the deconvolution-based normalization method available in the R/Bioconductor scran package (v1.10.1). Briefly, cells are ordered by their library size and segregated into pools using a sliding window ranging from 20 to 100. The sum of expression in each pool is then normalized to the average expression of all cells. The pool-based size factors are estimated and deconvolved to their cell-based counterparts.
Drop-seq data clustering and marker gene detection.
The Seurat R package was used for clustering analysis. Briefly, 309 variable genes showing a dispersion (variance/mean) of at least two standard deviations from the expected dispersion were selected (FindVariableGenes function of the Seurat R package). The top 30 principal components (PCs) were then calculated using the variable genes. The significant PCs were selected using the Jackstraw method available in the Seurat R package and their coordinates were used for clustering (FindClusters function in the Seurat package with resolution = 0.4). The marker genes were then detected by comparing each cluster to all of the others using a likelihood ratio using the FindAllMarkers function of the Seurat R package. Genes showing at least 1.5-fold enrichment and expressed in at least 60% of the cells in the target cluster and <20% of the other cells were selected as marker genes. The low-dimensional projection representation of the data was performed using uniform manifold approximation and projection implemented in the uwot R package (https://github.com/jlmelville/uwot) using the 11 most significant PCs as input.
Pseudo-time construction.
The Monocle package (v2.10.0) was used to generate the pseudo-time. Briefly, the normalized expression data were used to create a Monocle object with the ‘expressionFamily’ parameters set to ‘gaussianff’. Next, variable genes detected by Seurat were used to define the cells’ progress by calling the function ‘setOrderingFilter’. Then, the data dimensionality was reduced using Monocle’s DDRTree method using the function ‘reduceDimension’. Finally, the pseudo-time was constructed using the ‘orderCells’ method.
Clustering of Drop-seq clusters and RNA-seq samples.
The 309 variable genes/repeats identified from Drop-seq were used to compare the mean expression profile of the clusters identified in Drop-seq to the expression profile of bulk RNA-seq samples. As the expression profiles were generated using two different technologies, the technical batch effect had to be removed. Therefore, we used the ‘ComBat’ function from the R/Bioconductor sva package (3.30.1) to regress-out the technical effect. The first two PCs of the corrected expression were calculated using the ‘prcomp’ R function and then a complete-linkage hierarchical clustering was performed.
RRBS and data analysis.
DNA (1 ng) with a 0.5% non-methylated λ DNA spike-in was digested by MspI for 3.5 h. DNA was then end-repaired, dA-tailed and ligated with methylated adaptors. Bisulfite conversion was carried out using an EpiTect fast bisulfite conversion kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Bisulfite-converted DNA was then amplified with five PCR cycles to obtain the final library. The RRBS libraries were subjected to pair-end (2 × 110 bp) sequencing on a HiSeq 2500 (Illumina). Raw reads were first trimmed using TrimGalor (v0.4.5) with parameters ‘--three_prime_clip_R1 2 --length 35’ then mapped the mm10 genome using Bismark (v0.20.0) and bowtie2 (v2.3.4.3). Reads mapping to the positive and negative strand were extracted separately using samtools then the methylation levels were estimated using bismark_methylation_extractor. CpG sites overlapping with known single nucleotide polymorphisms were removed and sites with at least 5× coverage were used for the downstream analysis. Promoters were defined as TSS ± 1 kb and only promoters harbouring at least 3 CpG sites were considered.
Western blotting.
Protein was purified using M-PER Mammalian Protein Extraction Reagent (Thermo Scientific, cat. no. 78501) with protease inhibitor (Roche, cat. no. 4693159001). Western blotting was carried out with 4–12% Bis-Tris gradient gel (Invitrogen, NP0322BOX) with the following antibodies: Myc (1:1,000, Proteintech, 10828–1-AP, lot number: 00060703), Dnmt1 (1:1,000, Cell Signaling, 5032T, D63A6, lot number 1), Gapdh (1:10,000, Ambion, AM4300, 6C5, lot number 00562237), goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) secondary antibody, HRP (1:10,000, Invitrogen, 31430, lot number QD216575) and goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) secondary antibody, HRP (1:10,000, Invitrogen, 31460, lot number RB230194).
ESC and spontaneous 2C-like methylation data analysis.
We used the publicly available ESC and 2C-like (MuERVL+, Zscan4+) PBAT methylation data available under GEO accession numbers (GSM1966777, GSM1966778, GSM1966779, GSM1966780, GSM1966781 and GSM1966782). We directly used the mm10 processed data deposited by the authors. Briefly, the stranded CpG methylation profile was first converted into an unstranded profile by combining the positive and negative signal, then the methylation was estimated as the number of detected Cs compared to the total coverage. Only promoters harbouring at least 3 CpG sites were considered.
Dux and Myc ChIP-seq data analysis.
Dux ChIP-seq data were downloaded from a previous publication under GEO accession number GSE95517. The Myc ChIP-seq dataset was from ref. with GEO accession number GSM1171648. Raw reads were trimmed using Trimmomatic and then mapped to the mm10 genome using Bowtie2 (v2.2.9). Multi-mapped and unmapped and low-quality reads were removed using samtools (v1.3.1) and PCR duplicates were removed using the MarkDuplicates command from Picard tools (v2.8.0).
Statistics and reproducibility.
Statistical significance was determined using Student’s t-test (two-tailed) or a non-parametric Mann–Whitney U-test for datasets with non-normal distribution, as indicated in the corresponding figure legends. For the t-test, Welch’s correction was used for unequal variance. Boxes in all box plots extend from the 25th to 75th percentiles, with a line at the median. The whiskers show the minimum and maximum values. Statistical tests were performed using Prism7 (GraphPad Software) or R. The size effects for the Mann–Whitney (U-test were calculated as , where Z is the Z value of the Mann–Whitney (U-test (obtained using the coin R package) and N is the number of samples. For the t-test, we used the unbiased Hedge’s g effect with the Hedge’s effect size correction applied . Pearson correlation was calculated using the cor function in R. All sequencing experiments presented in the manuscript were independently performed twice and the quality information is included in Supplementary Table 9. All other experiments were performed at least twice independently with similar results with each experiment involving at least three biological samples.
Reporting Summary.
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Supplementary Material
Data availability
RNA-seq, Drop-seq, RRBS and CRISPR screen-related data, including the sgRNA read counts, that support the findings of this study have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under the accession code GSE121459. Previously published sequencing data that were reanalysed here are available in the GEO under the accession codes GSE85766 (Promoter methylation in ESCs and 2C-like cells), GSE95517 (Dux ChIP-seq) and GSM1171648 (Myc ChIP-seq), and the samples GSM1966767, GSM1966768 and GSM1966769 (Zscan+ and MuERVL+ spontaneous 2C-like cell transcriptome). Source data for all figures have been provided as Supplementary Table 10. All other data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Code availability
All of the codes used in this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting summaries, source data, statements of code and data availability and associated accession codes are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-019-0343-0.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/S41556-019-0343-0.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
RNA-seq indicates a step-wise pattern of transcriptome reprogramming from ESC to 2C-like cell transition.
a, A schematic representation of the constructs in the reporter cell line. tdTomato is under the control of the MERVL promoter. synDux refers to codon-optimized exogenous Dux. PBS, primer-binding site. LTR, long terminal repeats. b, A diagrammatic representation of the different cell populations and the FACS threshold for cell isolation. c, A scatter plot comparing the gene/repeat expression profiles between D0 2C− (ESCs) and D1 2C+ (2C-like cells) populations (n = 32,831). The criteria for gene changes are FC > 2 and FDR < 0.001. FDRs were estimated using the Benjamini-Hochberg method on the P values of the two-sided quasi-likelihood F-test calculated using the edgeR package. d, A Venn diagram between Dux-bound genes in ESCs and genes upregulated in D1 2C+ cells. e, A scatter plot comparing the gene expression profiles between spontaneous 2C-like cells and Dux-induced 2C-like cells (Pearson correlation, r = 0.91, n = 27,220). f, A heatmap showing the relative expression levels of group 1 and group 2 genes from 2 biologically independent samples of D0 2C−, D1 2C− and D1 2C+ cell populations (left) and the −log10[P value] of the gene ontology (GO) terms enriched in each category of genes (right, right-tailed Fisher’s exact test). The number of genes in each category is indicated at the top of each GO enrichment plot (right). b-f were summarized from two independent replicates of RNA-seq experiments (n refers to the number of transcribed genes/repeats). Statistical source data can be found in Supplementary Table 10.
scRNA-seq reveals a transcriptional roadmap of the ESC to 2C-like cell transition.
a, Workflow of scRNA-seq. Totals of 738, 456, 568 and 871 cells at 0 h, 12 h, 24 h and 36 h of Dux induction were collected. b, A uniform manifold approximation and projection representation (UMAP) of cells sequenced by Drop-seq. Cluster 1 (1,780 cells), Cluster 2 (512 cells), Cluster 3 (341 cells). c, A violin plot showing the log2 expression of representative genes in each cluster (n = 1,780 cells, 512 cells and 341 cells respectively for clusters 1, 2 and 3). d, A heatmap showing the normalized expression of marker genes in each cluster. e, Hierarchical clustering (complete linkage) and PCA analysis of the relationship between single-cell clusters (n = 3 clusters) and FACS-isolated cell populations (n = 6 biologically independent cell populations isolated by FACS) based on the transcriptional profiles of commonly expressed genes/repeats (n = 18,373 genes/repeats). R1/2, replicate 1/2. f, A bar plot showing the proportion of the different cell clusters at different time points of Dux induction. On Dux induction, an increased proportion of cells transit into the intermediate or 2C-like state. g, Scatter plots showing cells along the projected pseudo-time (top panel) and Zscan4d expression following the dynamics of the ESC to 2C-like cell transition. h, Top: box plots showing the expression of 2C+-downregulated pluripotent genes (n = 135 genes), 2C+-upregulated 2-cell-embryo-specific genes (n = 75 genes) and activated repeats (n = 501 repeats) in each cell cluster. The black central line is the median, the box limits indicate the upper and lower quartiles, the whiskers indicate the 1.5 interquartile range and dots represent outliers. P values were calculated by two-tailed Mann–Whitney U-tests and effect sizes (shown as r) were calculated as , where Z is the Z value of the Mann–Whitney U-test and N is the number of samples. Bottom: violin plots showing the expression of representative genes and repeats in each cell cluster (n = 1,780, 512 and 341 cells, respectively, for clusters 1, 2 and 3). The violin plots in c,h show the kernel density estimation of the distribution of the gene expression in each cluster. The width of the plot represents the proportion of data with the corresponding expression value. Statistical source data can be found in Supplementary Table 10.
CRISPR–Cas9 screening identified regulators mediating the ESC to 2C-like cell transition.
a, A schematic of the CRISPR–Cas9 screen. Two biologically independent screens were performed. b, The sgRNA count enrichment from the first screen replicate. Notably, several known negative regulators, such as Daxx, Max and Mga, were also identified in the screen, supporting the validity of our screen. The green dots indicate inhibitors identified by this screen, the orange dots indicate positive regulators identified by this screen, and the blue dots indicate known regulators. c, The interaction network of the top candidates identified from the screen. d, The fold change (FC) of the 2C-like cells relative to the sgGFP control after 1 d Dux induction. The X in sgX refers to the gene that sgRNA targets to. Shown are mean ± s.d., n = 3 biologically independent samples. The experiment was repeated independently twice with similar results. The source data can be found in Supplementary Table 10.
Myc impedes the repression of 2C+-downregulated genes at the early stage of the ESC to 2C-like cell transition.
a, The percentage of 2C-like cells after 1 d Dux induction of the indicated manipulation in three independent ESC clones and representative FACS from clone 8. Shown are mean ± s.d., n = 3 biologically independent cell cultures. b, The relative expression (quantitative PCR with reverse transcription (qRT-PCR)) of endogenous and exogenous Dux normalized to Gapdh after 1 d induction. FC, fold change. Shown are mean ± s.d., n = 3 biologically independent cell cultures. c, A Venn diagram of Myc-bound genes in ESCs overlapped with 2C+-upregulated and -downregulated genes, respectively. d, The expression levels of Myc-bound 2C+- downregulated genes (n = 1,059 genes) and 2C+-upregulated genes (n = 194 genes). e, A pie chart showing the relative percentage of group 1 and group 2 genes in Myc-bound 2C+-downregulated genes. f, A box plot showing the log2 expression in each cell cluster of Myc-bound 2C+-downregulated genes detected in single-cell data (n = 408 genes). g, The fold change (FC) of the 2C-like cell population after 1 d Dux induction in sgMyc relative to the sgGFP control. Shown are mean ± s.d., n = 3 biologically independent cell cultures. In a,b,g, the P values (indicated as numbers in the graphs) were calculated by unpaired t-test, two-tailed, two-sample unequal variance. The experiments were repeated independently twice with similar results. In d,f, the black central line is the median, the box limits indicate the upper and lower quartiles, the whiskers indicate the 1.5 interquartile range and the dots represent outliers. P values were calculated by two-tailed Mann–Whitney U-tests and effect sizes (shown as r) were calculated as , where Z is the Z value of the Mann–Whitney U-test and N is the number of samples. d-f were based on two independent replicates of RNA-seq experiments. Statistical source data can be found in Supplementary Table 10.
Dnmt1 impedes activation of 2C+-upregulated genes during the late stage of the ESC to 2C-like cell transition.
a, The percentage of 2C-like cells after 1 d Dux induction of the indicated manipulation in three independent ESC clones and representative FACS from clone 8. Shown are mean ± s.d., n = 3 biologically independent cell cultures. b, The relative expression (quantitative PCR with reverse transcription (qRT-PCR)) of endogenous and exogenous Dux normalized to Gapdh after 1 d induction. FC, fold change. Shown are mean ± s.d., n = 3 biologically independent cell cultures. c, Promoter (TSS± 1 kb) methylation of 2C+-upregulated (n = 751 genes) and -downregulated (n = 1,170 genes) genes in sgDnmt1- and sgGFP-treated cells measured by reduced-representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS). d, The expression level of 2C+-upregulated (n = 2,285 genes) and 2C+-downregulated (n = 2,724 genes) genes. e, A Venn diagram showing overlaps of Dnmt1-repressed genes/repeats and 2C+-upregulated genes/repeats (372 out of 397, 93.7%). Dnmt1-repressed genes/repeats (283 genes and 114 repeats) are defined as elements that are further activated in sgDnmt1 cells compared to sgGFP cells on Dux induction (FC > 2 and P value < 0.001). f, A pie chart showing the relative percentage of group 1 and group 2 genes in Dnmt1-repressed genes/repeats. g, A box plot showing the log2 expression in each cell cluster of Dnmt1-repressed genes/repeats detected in single-cell data (n = 227 genes/repeats). h, The fold change (FC) of the 2C-like cell population after 1 d Dux induction in sgDnmt1 relative to the sgGFP control. Shown are mean ± s.d., n = 3 biologically independent cell cultures. In a,b,h, the P values (indicated as numbers in the graphs) were calculated by unpaired t-test, two-tailed, two-sample unequal variance. The experiments were repeated independently twice with similar results. In c,d,g, the black central line is the median, the box limits indicate the upper and lower quartiles, the whiskers indicate the 1.5 interquartile range and the dots represent outliers. P values were calculated by two-tailed Mann–Whitney U-tests and effect sizes (shown as r) were calculated as , where Z is the Z value of the Mann–Whitney U-test and N is the number of samples. c-g were based on two independent replicates of RNA-seq experiments. Statistical source data can be found in Supplementary Table 10.
Dnmt1 and Myc may impede the two-step transcriptional reprogramming of the ESC to 2C-like cell transition.
a, The percentage of 2C-like cell population after 1 d Dux induction alone or combined sgMyc and sgDnmt1 relative to the sgGFP control. Shown are mean ± s.d., n = 3 biologically independent cell cultures. Representative FACS results are shown. P values (indicated as numbers in the graphs) were calculated by unpaired t-test, two-tailed, two-sample unequal variance. The experiment was repeated independently twice with similar results. b, A model showing that Dnmt1 and Myc impede the transcriptional reprogramming of the 2C-like transition at different stages. Statistical source data can be found in Supplementary Table 10.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PMID 33513212 — A host receptor enables type 1 pilus-mediated pathogenesis of Escherichia coli pyelonephritis.
PLoS pathogens (2021) · https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33513212/

A host receptor enables type 1 pilus-mediated pathogenesis of Escherichia coli pyelonephritis
Type 1 pili have long been considered the major virulence factor enabling colonization of the urinary bladder by uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC). The molecular pathogenesis of pyelonephritis is less well characterized, due to previous limitations in preclinical modeling of kidney infection. Here, we demonstrate in a recently developed mouse model that beyond bladder infection, type 1 pili also are critical for establishment of ascending pyelonephritis. Bacterial mutants lacking the type 1 pilus adhesin (FimH) were unable to establish kidney infection in male C3H/HeN mice. We developed an in vitro model of FimH-dependent UPEC binding to renal collecting duct cells, and performed a CRISPR screen in these cells, identifying desmoglein-2 as a primary renal epithelial receptor for FimH. The mannosylated extracellular domain of human DSG2 bound directly to the lectin domain of FimH in vitro, and introduction of a mutation in the FimH mannose-binding pocket abolished binding to DSG2. In infected C3H/HeN mice, type 1-piliated UPEC and Dsg2 were co-localized within collecting ducts, and administration of mannoside FIM1033, a potent small-molecule inhibitor of FimH, significantly attenuated bacterial loads in pyelonephritis. Our results broaden the biological importance of FimH, specify the first renal FimH receptor, and indicate that FimH-targeted therapeutics will also have application in pyelonephritis.
Author summary
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are among the most common bacterial infections in humans. While much has been discovered about how E. coli cause bladder infections, less is known about the host-pathogen interactions that underlie kidney infection (pyelonephritis). We employed recently developed mouse models to show that bacterial surface fibers called type 1 pili, which bear the adhesive protein FimH and are known to mediate E. coli binding to bladder epithelium, are also required for ascending kidney infection. We developed a cell-culture model of bacterial binding to renal collecting duct, then performed a screen using the gene-editing tool CRISPR to identify the first known FimH receptor in the kidney. This epithelial cell-surface protein, desmoglein-2, was shown to directly bind FimH, and we localized this binding to specific extracellular domains of DSG2. Further, we showed that mannosides, small-molecule FimH inhibitors currently in development to treat bladder infection, are also effective in experimental kidney infection. Our study reveals a novel host-pathogen interaction during pyelonephritis and demonstrates how this interaction may be therapeutically targeted.
Introduction
Bacterial adhesion to urinary tract epithelium is a critical step in establishing urinary tract infection (UTI). Strains of uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC), the main causative agents of UTIs, carry in their genomes a variable repertoire of adhesive pili assembled via the canonical chaperone-usher pathway (CUP). Given their importance in host-pathogen interactions, UPEC adhesins including CUP pili have received considerable attention as mediators of pathogenesis and potential therapeutic targets. Within the mammalian bladder, UPEC employ type 1 pili terminating in the FimH adhesin, which binds α-d-mannose with stereochemical specificity. FimH-mediated UPEC binding to mannosylated uroplakins that coat the luminal surfaces of superficial uroepithelial (facet) cells is a key event in the pathogenesis of cystitis. UPEC can subsequently be internalized into facet cells, where they replicate and establish intracellular bacterial communities (IBCs). Bacteria within IBCs are protected from phagocytosis and other host defenses, and this community behavior within the bladder is a critical component of UPEC cystitis.
Less is known about the host-pathogen interactions enabling establishment of upper-tract UTIs, including pyelonephritis and renal abscess. Another CUP pilus, the P pilus, is tipped with the PapG adhesin, which has been implicated in human pyelonephritis. However, data regarding the participation of P pili in murine pyelonephritis vary among prior studies, potentially due to disparities in host and bacterial strains used, and species specificity in the glycolipid receptors for PapG. Preclinical modeling of UTIs has been performed predominantly in female mice, and in a majority of murine backgrounds, upper-tract UTI resolves spontaneously and without significant sequelae. Historically, female mice have been utilized in models of experimental UTI, typically initiated by catheter-directed inoculation of the mouse bladder; reliable catheter access to the male mouse bladder is technically challenging. We previously developed an inoculation technique for initiating UTI in both male and female mice; when normal anatomic protections in males were thus bypassed, males evidenced more severe UTI, reflected throughout the course of infection by higher bladder and kidney bacterial loads, leukocyte infiltration, and inflammation. Of note, these findings aligned with human epidemiologic data showing higher morbidity from complicated UTI in men, and higher UTI incidence in women with polycystic ovary syndrome (a common hyperandrogenic state). In C3H/HeN mice (a background inherently featuring vesicoureteral reflux, a primary risk factor for upper-tract UTI in humans), males and androgen-exposed females developed severe pyelonephritis and renal abscesses. Renal infection was nucleated by collections of UPEC occupying collecting ducts and more proximal segments of the nephron, which we termed kidney bacterial communities (KBCs).
The consistent development of severe pyelonephritis in this model enables detailed investigation of bacterial and host factors involved in the establishment of ascending upper-tract UTI. We identified a previously unappreciated role in the kidney for the mannose-binding type 1 pilus adhesin FimH, previously recognized as a major urovirulence factor within the bladder. High-affinity mannosides, which neutralize FimH function and are in development for the treatment of cystitis, here significantly lowered bacterial burdens in the kidneys of mice with established pyelonephritis. To specify host factors required for upper-tract UTI, we performed a CRISPR-Cas9 screen in immortalized murine renal epithelial cells and identified desmoglein-2 (Dsg2) as a candidate receptor for FimH. The lectin domain of FimH (but not FimH with a point mutation that abolishes mannose binding) directly bound to the extracellular domain of human desmoglein-2 (DSG2). Finally, we observed co-localization of UPEC with Dsg2 in the collecting ducts of mice with ascending pyelonephritis. Our studies demonstrate that disruption of FimH binding to renal tubular epithelium represents a potential therapeutic intervention during pyelonephritis.
Results
Type 1 pili are required for both bladder and kidney infection in male C3H/HeN mice
Type 1 pili have long been implicated in pathogenesis of UPEC cystitis, but only recently have new experimental models enabled molecular interrogation of their role in pyelonephritis. We infected male C3H/HeN mice with either wild-type UTI89 (a prototypic UPEC strain), or UTI89ΔfimH, an isogenic mutant lacking the type 1 pilus adhesin. Two weeks post infection (wpi), UTI89ΔfimH was sharply attenuated compared to wild-type in bladder and kidney bacterial loads (p<0.0001; Fig 1A) and in incidence of visible renal abscess (1/16 vs 13/13; p<0.0001). We confirmed that UTI89ΔfimH reached the kidney normally following bladder inoculation, as kidney bacterial loads 24 hours post infection (hpi) were equivalent to wild-type (S1 Fig). Of note, an analogous defect was confirmed using the urosepsis UPEC isolate CFT073, whose isogenic CFT073ΔfimH mutant failed to colonize the kidney 2 wpi (S2 Fig). Using immunofluorescence microscopy, we demonstrated type 1 pili expression by UPEC in KBCs located within renal abscesses 2 wpi (Fig 1B). As UTI89 carries ten full or partial CUP operons, we similarly tested deletion mutants in each of the annotated CUP pili. No other CUP pilus mutants exhibited a defect in bladder or kidney infection in male C3H mice 2 wpi, after inoculation either alone (S3 Fig) or in competition with antibiotic-tagged UTI89 (S4 Fig).
Type 1 pili are required for bladder and kidney infection.
A) Male C3H/HeN mice were infected with UTI89 (closed circles) or UTI89ΔfimH (open diamonds), and organs were harvested 2 wpi. Bacterial loads after WT infection were significantly higher than with ΔfimH in both the bladder and kidneys (****p<0.0001). Horizontal bars indicate geometric mean, and dotted line indicates limit of detection. n = 13–16 mice per group over 3 independent experiments. B) Immunofluorescence microscopy of C3H/HeN male kidney 2 wpi with UTI89, showing expression of type 1 pili within kidney bacterial communities (magnified in inset; green, anti-type 1 pili; red, SYTO 61 nuclear stain). Scale bar, 20 μm.
The pilin and lectin domains of FimH together exist in an equilibrium between tense and relaxed states with differential mannose binding affinity. Conversion between these states is governed in part by a catch-bond mechanism. In the relaxed state, the FimH lectin domain samples conformational ensembles, allowing it to act as a molecular tether, with the mannose binding pocket in a conformation able to bind mannose tightly; in the tense state, the pocket is open and thus binds mannose only weakly. In the bladder, the ability of FimH to transition between these states enables optimal epithelial binding by UPEC. We infected male C3H/HeN mice with wild-type UTI89 or with UTI89ΔfimH complemented with FimHA27V/V163A, a variant that predominantly adopts the relaxed conformation (high-affinity mannose-binding state). Paradoxically, UPEC expressing this variant are attenuated during cystitis in female mice. Here, we found similarly that UTI89 FimHA27V/V163A also failed to establish pyelonephritis, with significantly lower bacterial loads in kidneys (p = 0.001) as well as bladder (p<0.0001) compared to wild-type UTI89 (S5 Fig). Further, the type 1 pilus rod, formed from FimA subunits, normally can unwind from a tightly coiled helix to a more linearized rod; this action is hypothesized to help UPEC withstand the shear force of urine flow. A variant in the type 1 pilus helical rod, FimAA22R, requires less force to adopt the unwound form, but UPEC expressing this variant are attenuated in the female mouse bladder. We found that UTI89 expressing FimAA22R was also attenuated in the kidneys (p = 0.0038) and bladders (p<0.0001) of male C3H/HeN mice 2 wpi (S5 Fig). Thus, the conformational dynamics of type 1 pili, critical in establishing bladder infection, are similarly important in ascending pyelonephritis. Collectively, our data demonstrate that beyond their well-described role in establishing bladder infection, UPEC type 1 pili are also important in initiating ascending pyelonephritis and renal abscess.
Murine collecting duct cells display type 1 pili-dependent UPEC binding
The collecting duct is the first nephron segment encountered by ascending UPEC. Consistent with prior findings, ascending UPEC were located within collecting ducts in C3H/HeN mice 5 dpi (Fig 2A). Therefore, we chose mouse intramedullary collecting duct (IMCD-3) cells to establish an in vitro model of type 1 pili binding to kidney epithelium. In standard bacterial binding assays, UTI89 ΔfimH was significantly attenuated compared to wild-type UTI89 (Fig 2B), recapitulating what we observed in in vivo infection. Following IMCD-3 cell infection and anti-E. coli antibody staining, we confirmed by flow cytometry the in vitro binding defect of ΔfimH (Fig 2C and 2D). This defect was complemented by chromosomal re-integration of wild-type fimH, but not by integration of the fimHQ133K mutant, which lacks mannose binding activity (S6 Fig). The binding defect was also replicated in CFT073 ΔfimH (S6 Fig). Finally, UPEC binding to collecting duct cells was significantly inhibited by methyl α-d-mannopyranoside and to an even greater extent by mannoside FIM1033 (S7 Fig). Thus, the in vivo requirement for type 1 pilus function is reflected in in vitro binding of UPEC to IMCD-3 cells.
Murine collecting duct cells display type 1 pili-dependent UPEC binding.
A) Early intratubular colonies of UPEC (green) were localized 5 dpi in male C3H/HeN mice collecting duct tubules (AQP2+, red; DAPI, blue; scale bar, 10 μm). B) To intramedullary collecting duct (IMCD-3) cells, WT UTI89 (filled circles) displayed significantly higher levels of bacterial binding than ΔfimH (open diamonds; ****p<0.0001) (MOI 20). Horizontal bars indicate geometric mean. n = 12 samples per group over 4 independent experiments. C, D) Binding of IMCD-3 cells by UTI89 or ΔfimH was quantified by flow cytometry after gating on single cells. C) FITC signal (anti-E. coli) was evident in IMCD-3 cells infected with wild-type UTI89 (navy blue) compared with medium alone (green); infection with ΔfimH yielded negligible signal (orange). D) Cells infected with UTI89 displayed significantly higher median fluorescence intensity (MFI) than those treated with medium alone or ΔfimH (****p<0.0001). n = 8–15 samples per group over 6 independent experiments.
A CRISPR screen identifies candidate type 1 pilus receptor desmoglein-2
Although type 1 pili are well known as critical virulence factors in the bladder, they have not been implicated in ascending pyelonephritis, and a cognate receptor has not been identified. To screen for host genes participating in type 1 pili-dependent binding of UPEC to collecting duct epithelium, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screen using the Brie sgRNA library in IMCD-3 cells (Fig 3A), providing 4× nominal coverage of each gene within the mouse genome. The pooled library of edited cells were inoculated with UPEC, fixed and stained, and subsequently flow-sorted for the population of cells with the lowest fluorescence (Fig 3A). Genomic DNA was extracted from sorted cells, subjected to Illumina sequencing, and analyzed using the probability mass function of a hypergeometric distribution to identify candidate genes statistically associated with bacterial binding (S1 Table). Among these candidates (Fig 3B), we focused on genes encoding proteins that would localize to the cell surface and could be available to interact with bacterial pili. The screen revealed deficient UPEC binding to cells edited with guides targeting desmoglein-2 (Dsg2; Fig 3B), which encodes a mannosylated cell junctional protein displayed on kidney tubular epithelia throughout the nephron. By immunofluorescence microscopy of IMCD-3 cells incubated with UPEC, we observed co-localization of UPEC with Dsg2 (Fig 3C).
A lentiviral CRISPR screen identifies candidate type 1 pilus receptor desmoglein-2.
A) Schematic of screen design. To screen for host genes responsible for type 1 pili-dependent binding to this cell line, we transduced the Brie library of mouse guide RNAs into IMCD-3 cells bearing Cas9, providing 4× nominal coverage of each gene within the mouse genome. Cells were then bound (MOI 150) by UTI89 and sorted by fluorescent labeling, isolating cells unbound by bacteria. Genomic DNA was extracted and sequenced, identifying candidate genes that may be required for UPEC binding to IMCD-3 cells. B) Volcano plot results from sorted and sequenced cells. Colored dots represent genes having an average log2 fold change >0.5 and a–log10(p-value) >2.5. C) After in vitro binding, desmoglein-2 (red) on IMCD-3 cells co-localized with UPEC (green); scale bar, 5 μm. Lower panel demonstrates co-localization in orthogonal view of z-stack projection.
FimH binds DSG2 in vitro
Desmoglein-2 is a member of the cadherin superfamily and in humans and mice comprises five extracellular cadherin (EC) domains, a single transmembrane segment, and an intracellular domain (Fig 4A). To determine whether desmoglein-2 binds directly to FimH, we generated two forms of recombinant 6×His-tagged human DSG2 (EC1-5, amino acids A1-A553): in wild-type Expi293F cells, and from Expi293F GnTI- cells (which lack complex N-glycans and instead exhibit uniform GlcNAc2Man5 glycosylation). We also purified the lectin domain of FimH (FimHLD, amino acids F1-G160) from E. coli (S8 Fig). By biolayer interferometry (BLI), FimHLD bound to DSG2 EC1-5 from wild-type cells with an apparent binding affinity of 1.6 μM (Fig 4B and S9 Fig). In comparison, DSG2 EC1-5 purified from GnTI- cells exhibited higher binding to FimHLD (KD,apparent = 484 nM, p = 0.008; Fig 4B), consistent with preferential binding of FimHLD to highly mannosylated structures. In contrast, purified FimHQ133K did not bind to either variant of DSG2 EC1-5 (p = 0.036; Fig 4B). Finally, FimHLD bound only minimally to DSG2 EC1-3 (amino acids A1-N332; p = 0.015 vs EC1-5; Fig 4B). Taken together, these data show that FimH binds the extracellular portion of DSG2 in a mannose-dependent manner, and that DSG2 domains EC4 and/or EC5 mediate FimH binding.
The FimH lectin domain directly binds DSG2 EC1-5 in a mannose-specific manner.
A) Schematic of human DSG2, with five extracellular cadherin domains (EC1-5; blue) followed by a single transmembrane (TM) segment and the cytoplasmic (desmoglein) portion of the protein (gray). O-linked mannoses are represented by green dots, N-linked glycosylation sites with terminal mannose shown by yellow dots. B) Normalized BLI signal (mean ± SD) of DSG2 ectodomains (immobilized at 1 μg/mL) binding to FimHLD or FimHQ133K (10 μM). Relative BLI signals were normalized to amount of captured WT DSG2 EC1-5. DSG2 EC1-5 and DSG2 EC1-3 were purified from wild-type Expi293F cells, and DSG2 EC1-5 was also purified from Expi293F GnTI- cells (which lack complex N-glycans and instead exhibit uniform GlcNAc2Man5 glycosylation). *p = 0.036 (EC1-5 WT vs Q133K), **p = 0.008 (EC1-5 WT vs GnTI-), *p = 0.015 (EC1-5 vs EC1-3). n = 3–5 independent experiments per group.
To validate Dsg2 as a UPEC receptor, we edited IMCD-3 cells with CRISPR-Cas9 to achieve specific deletion of Dsg2. Though hundreds of edited clones were screened, no clones entirely lacking Dsg2 expression were obtained, suggesting that complete Dsg2 deletion is physiologically detrimental. Of note, germline Dsg2 deletion in mice is lethal. We did identify two gene-edited clones (namely C4 and F11) that exhibited sharply reduced Dsg2 transcript expression (Fig 5A); by quantitative immunoblot of cell lysates, these knock-down clones expressed significantly less Dsg2 protein than wild-type IMCD-3 cells (Fig 5B; median C4/WT ratio 4.3%, p = 0.0022; median F11/WT ratio 4.7%, p = 0.0087). By flow cytometry, median binding of C4 and F11 cells by UPEC was decreased by 33% and 46% compared with WT IMCD-3 cells (p = 0.0235 and 0.0032, respectively; Fig 5C and 5D).
Dsg2 knock-down cells exhibit a UPEC binding defect.
A) qPCR of desmoglein-2 normalized to GAPDH in IMCD-3 Dsg2 knock-down clones C4 and F11 (C4/WT *p = 0.0458, F11/WT *p = 0.0449). n = 3 independent samples per group, error bars represent standard error of the mean. B) Quantitative immunoblot for Dsg2 in clones C4 and F11, normalized to β-actin (median C4/WT ratio 4.3%, * p = 0.0022; median F11/WT ratio 4.7%, **p = 0.0087). Inset shows representative blot. n = 6 independent samples per group. C, D) Binding of UTI89 to IMCD-3 cells or to clones C4 and F11 (MOI 150) was quantified by flow cytometry after gating on single cells. C) Histogram of FITC shift (anti-E. coli) in infected IMCD-3 cells. Medium alone (green) or infection with ΔfimH reflects no shift (orange); clones C4 and F11 (light and dark pink respectively) exhibited significantly decreased UPEC binding compared to WT IMCD-3 cells (navy blue). D) Wild-type IMCD-3 cells infected with UTI89 displayed significantly higher median fluorescence intensity (MFI) than clones C4 and F11 (C4/WT *p = 0.0235; F11/WT **p = 0.0032). n = 15 samples per group over 5 independent experiments.
Targeting the Dsg2-FimH interaction during in vivo infection
In the kidneys of UPEC-infected C3H/HeN mice, we identified UPEC within Dsg2+, aquaporin-2+ collecting ducts 5 dpi (Fig 6A and 6B). Across multiple sections from several infected mice, of 239 intratubular UPEC colonies visualized 5 dpi, 228 (95%) resided in Dsg2+ tubules.
Mannoside treatment attenuates bladder and kidney infection.
A) Schematic of mannoside treatment experiments. Male C3H/HeN mice were infected with UTI89; after 5 d, mice were administered mannoside 29R (8 mg/kg/dose intraperitoneally (IP)) or vehicle (mock treatment) every 8 h for either 24 or 48 h. B) Intratubular colonies of UPEC (teal) were observed 5 dpi in male C3H/HeN mice within desmoglein-2 positive (Dsg2+, red) collecting ducts (aquaporin-2 [AQP2]+, green). DAPI, blue; scale bar, 10 μm. Mannoside treatment for 24 h (C) significantly reduced bacterial loads in the bladder (*p = 0.0255) and kidneys (*p = 0.0434) (n = 8–10 mice per group over 2 independent experiments), while an even more significant effect was seen with 48 h treatment (D; bladder ***p = 0.0003, kidneys **p = 0.0042; n = 8 mice per group over 2 independent experiments).
Finally, we hypothesized that if the Dsg2-FimH interaction was important for pyelonephritis, mannosides could be employed therapeutically in our mouse model. Male C3H/HeN mice were inoculated with UTI89, and early KBCs were allowed to form over 5 days; mice were then treated with mannoside FIM1033 (formerly termed 29R) (Fig 6A). Compared with mock-treated mice, bladder and kidney bacterial loads were significantly reduced by mannoside treatment for 24 h (kidney p = 0.0434, bladder p = 0.0255; Fig 6C) and even more so with treatment for 48 h (kidney p = 0.0042, bladder p = 0.0003; Fig 6D). These in vivo data support a model in which desmoglein-2 on collecting duct epithelium serves as a receptor for UPEC FimH during pyelonephritis in vivo.
Discussion
In this study, we detail the importance of type 1 pili in host-pathogen interaction during ascending pyelonephritis and identify desmoglein-2 as the first receptor for FimH on renal tubular epithelium. Our findings in male C3H mice confirm that type 1 pili are essential for cystitis (as in female mice), but more importantly provide both in vitro and in vivo evidence of the function of FimH in bacterial infection of the kidney. Furthermore, our ability to mitigate kidney infection with mannosides suggests that type 1 pilus-directed therapeutics currently under development for recurrent cystitis may also be useful in pyelonephritis.
Compared to bacterial cystitis, significantly less is known about the pathogenesis of UPEC pyelonephritis, primarily due to the fact that female mice of most backgrounds resolve kidney infection spontaneously. Work in humans has identified genetic factors that confer susceptibility to pyelonephritis and renal scarring, including polymorphisms reducing IRF3 or CXCR1 (encoding IL-8 receptor) expression, in certain UTI-prone kindreds. P pili have been considered the major adhesin in kidney infection. This work has been complicated by allelic variation in the P pilus adhesin PapG (UTI89 encodes the PapGIII allelic variant but does not express P pili under laboratory conditions, while the common pyelonephritis strain CFT073 expresses the PapGII variant). These three alleles exhibit differing affinity for various glycolipid receptors that are differentially expressed in the kidneys of humans and model animals–including mice, where further differences exist among backgrounds. Beyond our in vivo results, we found that P pili were also unnecessary for UPEC binding to IMCD-3 cells (S6 Fig). Finally, while P pili are enriched in the genomes of pyelonephritis-associated UPEC isolates for children with acute pyelonephritis, a significant proportion of UPEC isolates from women with acute and recurrent UTI lack P pili, suggesting a role for other adhesin(s) during ascending infection.
Recent works have employed new mouse models (including C3H/HeOuJ mice, male C3H/HeN mice, and androgenized female mice) which now enable detailed study of the pathogenesis of kidney infection and abscess formation. In our model of ascending UTI, type 1 pili were shown to be essential for maintenance of renal infection, through both genetic mutation of the pilus and pharmacological inhibition with mannosides. Other work has hinted at a role for type 1 pili and mannose targets in kidney infection. For instance, an early study in C3H/HeN female mice noted significant attenuation in both bladder and kidneys upon deletion of fimH in E. coli strain 1177 that was rescued upon complementation. Further, signaling through C5a receptor 1 (C5aR1), which regulates inflammatory cell recruitment in UPEC infection, may also enhance presentation of mannosylated glycoproteins by primary renal tubular epithelial cells. Meanwhile, experiments in which tubular infection was initiated via microinjection of UPEC directly into rat nephrons posited a role for type 1 pili in interbacterial interactions and biofilm formation. While our work indicates that FimH mediates renal epithelial binding (in agreement with prior staining of kidney sections using purified adhesins), the present work does not exclude a role for type 1 pili in interbacterial interactions and/or biofilm formation within the kidney. Inhibition of any of these interactions by administration of mannosides might confer therapeutic benefit in pyelonephritis.
As the C3H mouse background used here features vesicoureteral reflux, it is conceivable that ongoing bladder infection (enhanced by type 1 pili expression) may replenish the kidney niche. The converse is also likely true, as suggested by the data in S1 Fig, where the lack of attenuation of ΔfimH in the kidneys 24 hpi appears to obscure the bladder pathogenesis defect that would be expected from prior work. Thus, the infected kidneys presumably can continually re-seed the bladder niche. The absence of a kidney phenotype with ΔfimH 24 hpi may also indicate that an alternative host-pathogen interaction is responsible for initial UPEC binding. The timing of FimH action during UPEC kidney colonization is therefore an exciting avenue for future study.
Using a CRISPR-Cas9 screen, we identified desmoglein-2 as a receptor for UPEC during ascending infection. DSG2 is a member of the cadherin family of Ca2+-binding proteins, involved in intercellular junctions via the desmosome. Its identified roles in mammalian disease states are limited; of note, cardiomyocyte-specific conditional knockout of Dsg2 in mice phenocopies human arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy, which is correlated with loss-of-function DSG2 mutations. Interestingly, other members of the desmoglein family also act as receptors for unrelated microbes. Dsg2 has been specifically implicated as a receptor for group B adenovirus serotypes 3, 7, 11, and 14; of note, serotype 11 is most commonly associated with hemorrhagic cystitis in renal and other transplant recipients. Along the length of the nephron, DSG2 expression is highest within the collecting duct and decreases as one ascends to more proximal segments of the tubule. As a family, desmogleins (and other cadherins) exhibit a unique form of mannosylation in which α-d-mannose (the binding target of type 1 pili) is present as a novel O-linked glycosylation modification. Prior studies have demonstrated FimH binding to N-linked glycans containing a terminal mannose. While N-linked glycans are present on each EC domain of DSG2, our data suggest that FimH interaction with native DSG2 is mediated through EC4 and/or EC5 (Fig 4). Of particular interest is the possibility that the cadherin-specific O-linked α-d-mannose on EC4 may represent the preferred binding target. While FimH canonically binds mannose, existing studies have not aimed to interrogate whether the spatial arrangement of nearby amino acid residues may also influence binding affinity. Future work, including determination of the structural basis of DSG2-FimH binding, will further address this question.
One limitation of this study is that we were unable to obtain a complete Dsg2 knockout cell line, indicating that complete absence of Dsg2 may confer a significant defect in in vitro growth of IMCD-3 cells. It is becoming better appreciated that CRISPR-generated knockout cell clones display phenotypic plasticity, and residual low-level protein expression often persists. Therefore, it is difficult to precisely quantify what proportion of UPEC binding is to Dsg2 as opposed to other mannosylated cell-surface receptors. It is possible that Dsg2 knock-down leads to compensatory production of other proteins; that Dsg2 knock-down reveals the participation of more minor binding partners for type 1 pili; or that the amount of residual Dsg2 in the knock-down clones provides sufficient receptors for UPEC to bind a modest proportion of cells. The present data do not distinguish among these possibilities.
Our results indicate that Dsg2 may not be the sole receptor for UPEC within the kidney, but rather the most important receptor among others on renal tubular epithelium. The apical surfaces of bladder epithelial facet cells are coated with a comparatively restricted set of proteins, largely four uroplakins. Among these, uroplakin Ia bearing N-linked oligomannose is thought to be the primary receptor important for UPEC binding of intact bladder epithelium. In contrast, the renal tubular epithelium bears a wider variety of surface proteins, a number of which might be mannosylated. Of note, CRISPR knock-down of the glycosyltransferase Dad1 on IMCD-3 cells also conferred a UPEC binding defect (Fig 3B), suggesting that this enzyme may play a role in mannosylation of Dsg2 and/or other potential receptors for UPEC type 1 pili. Additionally, multiple innate immune genes were statistically enriched in the CRISPR screen (Fig 3B), hinting that innate response pathways may alter receptor expression and thereby influence UPEC binding; this too represents an avenue for future study.
The present work highlights the importance of type 1 pili and the mannosylated epithelial receptor desmoglein-2 in UPEC colonization of renal tubules. As the type 1 pilus adhesin FimH is already targetable by small-molecule inhibitors and vaccines in patients with cystitis, these therapeutics may prove useful in prevention or treatment of upper-tract UTI as well. Finally, desmoglein-2 is expressed widely across many epithelia, suggesting that it may serve as a FimH receptor in other UTI-relevant niches, perhaps as a secondary receptor in the urinary bladder or in the gut.
Materials and methods
Ethics statement
All animal protocols complied with relevant ethical regulations and received prior approval from the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Washington University (approval number 20180159).
Bacterial strains and growth
For mouse infections and for binding studies with IMCD-3 cells, bacteria were grown statically at 37°C for 18 h in Luria-Bertani (LB) broth. For the CRISPR screen, type 1 pili were induced by static growth at 37°C for 18 h, then 1:100 subculture and static growth for an additional 18 h. Bacterial strains were all previously published, with mutations generated using the λ Red Recombinase system (see S2 Table). Bacteria were pelleted at 7,500 × g at 4°C for 10 min, then resuspended to an OD600 of 1.0 (~4 × 108 colony-forming units [CFU]/mL) in sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for mouse infections, or in DMEM F-12 (Invitrogen 1132–0033) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; VWR 97068–085) for tissue culture experiments.
Mouse infections
Male C3H/HeN mice (Envigo) aged 8–9 weeks were infected as previously described. Briefly, mice were anesthetized with inhaled 3% isoflurane, and the lower abdomen was shaved and sterilized with 2% chlorhexidine solution. A 3-mm midline abdominal incision was made through the skin and peritoneum, exposing the bladder. The bladder was aseptically emptied before 50 μl of inoculum (1–2 × 107 CFU in PBS) was injected into the bladder lumen via 30-gauge needle over 10 s. The bladder was allowed to expand for an additional 10 s before the needle was removed. The peritoneum and skin incisions were closed with simple, interrupted sutures. At the time of surgery, mice were given sustained-release buprenorphine (1 mg/kg subcutaneously) for analgesia. At the indicated time points, mice were euthanized by CO2 asphyxiation. Bladders and kidney pairs were sterilely removed and homogenized in 1 mL or 0.8 mL PBS, respectively. Homogenates were serially diluted and plated on LB agar for CFU enumeration.
Immunofluorescence microscopy
Infected bladders and kidneys were bisected and fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for 24 h. Fixed tissues were embedded in paraffin, sectioned, and stained. Unstained slides were deparaffinized in xylenes, rehydrated in isopropanol, boiled in 10 mM sodium citrate, and blocked in 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA), 0.3% Triton-X 100 in PBS for 1–2 h at room temperature (RT). Tissue culture cells were fixed in methanol at -20°C for 10 min and then blocked in 3% BSA for 1 h. Slides were incubated with primary antibodies for 4 h or overnight at RT and then (after washing in PBS) with secondary antibodies for 1 h at RT. Slides were then mounted with ProLong Gold antifade reagent (Invitrogen) and images acquired on an Olympus FV1200 confocal microscope. Primary antibodies utilized were: rabbit anti-type 1 pili (1:500 dilution), rabbit anti-E. coli (1:1000 dilution, E3500-06C; US Biological), goat anti-E. coli (1:100–1:500 dilution, B65109G; Meridian Life Science), mouse anti-AQP2 conjugated with AlexaFluor 488 or 647 (1:50–1:200 dilution, sc-515770; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), mouse anti-desmoglein 2 (1:100 dilution, 6D8, MCA2272T, BioRad), rabbit anti-desmoglein 2 (1:100, A303-758A, Bethyl Labs). Secondary antibodies utilized were AlexaFluor 488-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:500 dilution, A11008; Life Technologies), AlexaFluor 647-conjugated chicken anti-rabbit IgG (1:200, A-21443;ThermoFisher), AlexaFluor 594-conjugated donkey anti-goat IgG (1:200, ab150132; abcam), Cy5-conjugated donkey anti-mouse IgG (1:250, 715-175-151; JacksonImmuno), AlexaFluor 488-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:1000, 111-095-144; JacksonImmuno). Nuclear staining was with DAPI (1:10,000) or SYTO 61 (1:1000, Molecular Probes).
Tissue culture
Murine intramedullary collecting duct cells (IMCD-3; ATCC CRL-2123) were cultured in DMEM F-12 supplemented with 10% FBS. Medium included 0.1 mg/mL penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco 15140–122) until the day before an experiment, when medium was changed to the above without antibiotics. Cells were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2.
In vitro binding assays
The day before infection, IMCD-3 cells were seeded in 24-well plates. Medium was removed and cells were washed with PBS supplemented with Mg2+ and Ca2+ (PBS-MgCa; Sigma-Aldrich D8662). After inoculation with UPEC at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 20, plates were centrifuged at 400 × g for 3 min, then returned to the incubator. To enumerate bound CFU, after 45 min, wells were washed 5 times with PBS-MgCa, then lysed with 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma T9284). To enumerate internalized CFU, after 60 min, cells were washed with PBS-MgCa, treated with medium containing 50 μg/mL gentamicin (Thermo Fisher 15750060), and incubated at 37°C for 90 min, then lysed with 0.1% Triton X-100. Lysates were serially diluted and plated to LB agar. Binding efficiencies were calculated in comparison to input wells, in which cells were inoculated with UPEC, incubated for 45 min, then lysed by addition of Triton X-100, and the well contents plated to LB agar for enumeration of input CFU.
Flow cytometry
The day before infection, IMCD-3 cells were seeded in 6-well plates. Cells were infected with UPEC (at MOI 20–150) for 45 min, then washed as described above; cells were liberated with 0.05% trypsin-0.02% EDTA (Gibco), pelleted, and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (Electron Microscopy Sciences) for 30–60 min at RT. Cells were then blocked in 3% BSA for 1 h at RT. Cells were stained with primary rabbit anti-E. coli antibody (1:500 dilution, E3500-06C; US Biological) or isotype control (Rabbit serum; Sigma-Aldrich R9133) and secondary AlexaFluor 488-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit IgG (Invitrogen A21206) for 1 h each. Samples were stored in 3% BSA until analyzed on a Becton Dickinson (BD) LSR II Fortessa flow cytometer. Gating strategy is shown in S10 Fig.
Generation of virus and viral constructs
Viruses were generated by transfecting 293T cells with lentiviral cDNA (VSV-G, pMD2.G, Addgene #12259; psPAX2, Addgene #12260; and construct of interest) using Opti-MEM (Thermo Fisher 31985062) and TransIT LT1 transfection reagent (Mirus MIR2300). Virus was harvested 48 h post transfection.
Library preparation and CRISPR screen
IMCD-3 cells were transduced with lentivirus containing Cas9 (pXPR_101, Addgene #52962) by spinoculation (1 mL of Cas9 lentivirus onto 3 × 106 cells), then selected with 5 μg/mL blasticidin (ThermoFisher A1113903). Cas9 activity was assayed by transducing cells with lentivirus containing pXPR_011 (Addgene #59702), which expresses eGFP and a sgRNA targeting eGFP, and selecting with 5 μg/mL puromycin (ThermoFisher A1113803). Loss of GFP expression in cells expressing the eGFP guide was assessed by flow cytometry as described above. After Cas9 activity was confirmed, a Brie mouse sgRNA library (Brie pXPR_003, Batch 3, Lot #m-AA89-20171107; generated by the Broad Institute) was transduced at MOI 0.5 into IMCD-3 Cas9 cells by spinoculation and selected with 5 μg/mL puromycin for 10 d until screening.
For screening, 5 × 106 IMCD-3 cells were seeded into eighty 15-cm dishes the day before infection. Cells were infected with UTI89 at MOI 150 and incubated at 37°C for 45–75 min, then fixed and stained for flow cytometry as described above. Samples were placed at 4°C overnight on a tube roller; the following day, the 5% least FITC-positive cells were collected on a Sony iCyt Synergy BSC sorter. Tubes containing these low-FITC sorted cells were centrifuged, resuspended in 250 μl PBS, and stored at -20°C. A total of 6 × 108 mock-treated cells were harvested, separated into aliquots of 8 × 107 cells, resuspended in 2 mL PBS, and stored at -20°C until genomic DNA preparation. DNA was extracted using QIAamp DNA Blood Maxi kit (Qiagen 51192) for mock samples and QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue kit (Qiagen 56404) for experimental samples.
Sequencing and bioinformatics
Illumina sequencing was performed as described previously. Briefly, genomic DNA was aliquoted into multiple wells of a 96-well plate (up to 10 μg of DNA in 50 μL total volume). Samples were sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2000. Barcodes in the P7 primer were deconvoluted, and the sgRNA sequence was mapped to a reference file of sgRNAs in the Brie library. To normalize for different numbers of reads per condition, read counts per sgRNA were normalized to 107 total reads per sample; this normalized value was then log2 transformed. We used the hypergeometric distribution method to rank sgRNAs and calculate gene p-values using the probability mass function of a hypergeometric distribution (https://portals.broadinstitute.org/gpp/public/analysis-tools/crispr-gene-scoring-help). We considered candidate genes those having an average log fold change >0.5 and a false discovery rate >2.5. For input of the hypergeometric distribution ranking, we subtracted the log2 normalized read values of the uninfected unsorted IMCD-3 Brie library from the log2 normalized read values of the 5% lowest UPEC-bound sorted cells. We used R Studio to visualize the results of the hypergeometric distribution analysis.
Generation of Dsg2 knock-down clones (C4 and F11)
Dsg2 knock-down clones C4 and F11 were among hundreds generated by the Genome Engineering and iPSC Center at Washington University School of Medicine. IMCD-3 cells were nucleofected with Cas9 and a Dsg2-specific sgRNA (5’ GGAACTACGCATCAAAGTTCTGG 3’). Single-cell clones were isolated by FACS and expanded in 96-well plates. Cells were harvested, and genomic DNA was amplified and subjected to targeted deep sequencing of a ~400-bp amplicon flanking the gRNA target. Clones were screened for frameshifts by sequencing the target region with Illumina MiSeq at ~1500× coverage. We obtained no clones that completely lacked Dsg2 expression. Frameshift mutations identified in knock-down clones C4 and F11 are detailed in S3 Table.
Quantitative PCR
RNA was isolated from tissue culture cells using the Qiagen RNeasy kit. qPCR was performed using the Applied Biosystems TaqMan RNA-to-Ct 1-Step Kit (ThermoFisher 4392938) and the probes listed in S4 Table (Integrated DNA Technologies).
Immunoblot
Samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane (Millipore) using overnight wet transfer (48mM Tris pH 9.2, 38mM glycine, 20% methanol, 0.05% SDS). After blocking for 6–8 h with 5% milk in PBS-T, blots were probed with rabbit anti-desmoglein-2 (1:250 dilution, A303-758A; Bethyl Labs) and mouse anti-β-actin (1:100,000 dilution, 3700; Cell Signaling) in PBS-T with 5% milk overnight. Blots were then secondarily probed with HRP-conjugated sheep anti-mouse IgG (1:1000 dilution, NA931V; GE) and HRP-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit IgG (1:1000 dilution, NA934V; GE) for 1 h. Gels were developed using Clarity and Clarity Max Western ECL substrates (1705060 and 1705062; BioRad). Western blot images were analyzed with ImageJ.
Protein production and biolayer interferometry (BLI)
Methods for purification of full-length FimH and the lectin domain (FimHLD; amino acids 1–160) have been described previously. Briefly, untagged FimHLD was purified from E. coli periplasmic extracts using ion-exchange and size-exclusion chromatography, dialyzed into sterile PBS, and stored at 4°C until use.
Expression constructs for 6×His-tagged human DSG2 EC1-5 (amino acids A1-A553) or DSG2 EC1-3 (amino acids A1-N332) (kind gifts of O. Harrison and L. Shapiro) were transfected (1 μg/mL of culture) into Expi293F cells (ThermoFisher) using 293fectin and Opti-MEM. Six days post transfection, the supernatant containing the 6×His-tagged DSG2 ectodomains was collected, dialyzed into 20mM Tris, 150mM NaCl pH 8 overnight at 4°C, batch purified by nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni-NTA) affinity chromatography, and then further purified by HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 200 size-exclusion chromatography (GE Healthcare). Protein was concentrated and was exchanged into a final buffer of sterile PBS, then stored at 4°C until use in binding experiments. DSG2 EC1-5 was also expressed in Expi293F GnTI- cells (which generate proteins lacking complex N-linked glycans but decorated only with high mannose) and purified as described above.
All BLI experiments were performed in 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 3 mM EDTA, and 0.005% P20 surfactant with 1% BSA at 25°C using an Octet-Red96 device (Pall ForteBio). DSG2 variants were biotinylated using EZ-Link NHS-PEG4-Biotin (Thermo Fisher) per manufacturer’s instructions. Biotinylated DSG2 was loaded onto streptavidin biosensors (ForteBio), then incubated with different concentrations of FimHLD or FimHQ133K (10 μM to 156 nM) for 15 min followed by a 20 min dissociation. Real-time data were analyzed using BIAevaluation 3.1 (GE Healthcare), and kinetic curves were fitted using a global 1:1 binding algorithm with drifting baseline.
Mannoside treatment
Male C3H/HeN mice were infected as described above. Beginning 5 dpi, mice were given mannoside FIM1033 (gift of Fimbrion Therapeutics), 8 mg/kg in sterile PBS with 4% DMSO, by intraperitoneal injection every 8 h for 24 or 48 h. Mock-treated mice were injected with 4% DMSO in sterile PBS. Mice were sacrificed 6 h post last treatment dose.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using Prism 8 (GraphPad Software). Differences were analyzed with the unpaired, two-tailed, nonparametric Mann-Whitney U test. P values <0.05 were deemed significant.
Supporting information

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PMID 36772830 — Systematic identification of factors involved in the silencing of germline genes in mouse embryonic stem cells.
Nucleic acids research (2023) · https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36772830/

Systematic identification of factors involved in the silencing of germline genes in mouse embryonic stem cells
Abstract
In mammals, many germline genes are epigenetically repressed to prevent their illegitimate expression in somatic cells. To advance our understanding of the mechanisms restricting the expression of germline genes, we analyzed their chromatin signature and performed a CRISPR-Cas9 knock-out screen for genes involved in germline gene repression using a Dazl-GFP reporter system in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs). We show that the repression of germline genes mainly depends on the polycomb complex PRC1.6 and DNA methylation, which function additively in mESCs. Furthermore, we validated novel genes involved in the repression of germline genes and characterized three of them: Usp7, Shfm1 (also known as Sem1) and Erh. Inactivation of Usp7, Shfm1 or Erh led to the upregulation of germline genes, as well as retrotransposons for Shfm1, in mESCs. Mechanistically, USP7 interacts with PRC1.6 components, promotes PRC1.6 stability and presence at germline genes, and facilitates DNA methylation deposition at germline gene promoters for long term repression. Our study provides a global view of the mechanisms and novel factors required for silencing germline genes in embryonic stem cells.
INTRODUCTION
The expression of many germline genes is normally suppressed in somatic lineages and restricted to germ cells, where they contribute to meiosis and gamete differentiation. Their expression needs to be tightly controlled because improper silencing of germline genes in somatic cells contributes to neoplasm and is a hallmark of aggressive cancer. Furthermore, their premature activation in primordial germ cells leads to precocious germline differentiation and impaired gametogenesis.
In mammals, the mechanisms of repression of germline genes are beginning to be elucidated and one of the main pathways is DNA methylation of CpG dinucleotides. In mice, a wave of demethylation occurs after fertilization followed by global de novo DNA methylation concomitant with implantation and epiblast formation. The establishment of DNA methylation is carried out by the de novo methyltransferases DNMT3A and DNMT3B while its maintenance requires DNMT1 and its cofactor UHRF1. In contrast to interspersed CpG dinucleotides, most CpG islands (CGIs) remain protected against DNA methylation. During development, de novo methylation of CG-rich promoters is almost exclusively targeted to a subset of germline genes, leading to their long-term repression in somatic lineages. Indeed, these genes are de-repressed in DNA methylation deficient mouse embryos, including germline genes previously shown to be regulated by DNA methylation in murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). A second wave of demethylation occurs in primordial germ cells (PGCs) and many of these germline genes require DNA demethylation to be activated in PGCs.
In mESCs, other mechanisms cooperate with DNA methylation to repress germline genes. The histone methyltransferase SETDB1 responsible for H3K9me3 deposition is required for limiting the expression of several germline genes in mESCs. The combined inactivation of the H3K9me3 readers CBX1, CBX3 and CBX5 (also known as HP1b, HP1g and HP1a respectively) also leads to increased expression of germline genes. In addition, several studies revealed a central role for the non-canonical polycomb repressive complex PRC1.6 in the repression of germlines genes in embryonic stem cells. The PRC1.6 complex is composed of PCGF6, RYBP, L3MBTL2, CBX3, WDR5, the DNA binding subunits MAX, MGA, E2F6 and DP1, and the catalytic subunits RING1A/B (also known as RNF1/2) responsible for H2AK119ub deposition. The promoter sequences of many germline genes contain the E2F6 consensus sequence or an E-box motif recognized by MAX/MGA. Inactivation of E2F6, MAX or MGA reduces PRC1.6 recruitment to germline genes and reactivates germline genes in mESCs. Furthermore, inactivation of the other PRC1.6 components PCGF6, L3MBTL2, RYBP or the catalytic subunits RING1A/B also results in an up-regulation of overlapping sets of germline genes. Interestingly, E2F6, MGA and MAX repress germline genes in part by favoring H3K9me3 deposition at germline genes in mESCs.
Temporal analyses suggest that H3K9me3 and PRC1.6 play crucial roles at germline genes in naïve cells when DNA methylation is not yet established, whereas DNA methylation becomes the predominant mechanism in differentiated cells. Furthermore, DNA methylation of germline gene promoters is reduced in Setdb1, Max, E2f6 or L3mbtl2 knockout ESCs or embryos and Mga mutant epiblast-like cells. These data suggest a stepwise mechanism by which SETDB1 and PRC1.6 repress germline genes before the global wave of DNA methylation, and subsequently favor DNA methylation of germline genes to establish long-term repression in post-implantation cells. Because ES cells cultured in standard serum and LIF conditions represent a mixed population of naïve and primed cells with distinct epigenetic states, they rely simultaneously on several mechanisms (such as H3K9me3, PRC1.6 and DNA methylation) to repress germline genes and represent a good model to study the multiple epigenetic mechanisms underlying germline genes repression during development.
Despite progress in the last years, the complete mechanisms involved in the silencing of germline genes in mammalian somatic cells remain unclear. To advance our understanding of germline gene regulation, we performed a computational analysis of their chromatin signature and performed a functional genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 knock-out screen in mESCs. We uncover multiple factors involved in the repression of germline genes and present validation of three novel candidates. Our data provide a molecular roadmap of the mechanisms limiting the expression of germline genes in mouse embryonic stem cells and novel key factors involved in this process.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Promoter annotation
We used RefSeq gene annotation and promoters were defined as −1000 bp to +500 bp around RefSeq TSS. For promoter classification based on CpG density, we calculated for each promoter the CpG ratio and GC content in 500 bp sliding windows with 20 bp increments. LCP were defined as containing no window with a CpG ratio >0.45, HCP were defined as containing at least one window with a CpG ratio >0.65 and a GC content >55%, and the remaining promoters were defined as ICP.
Computational analysis of ChIP-seq data
Raw reads of ChIP-seq datasets for histone modifications, histone variants and proteins (Supplementary Table S1) were downloaded from GEO/SRA. The reads were trimmed using trim_galore (version 0.6.4 options -q 20 –stringency 2), aligned to the mouse genome (mm10) using bowtie2 (version 2.3.0) and selected if the mapping quality ≥10. Read density tracks were generated using genomeCoverageBed from bedtools, from reads extended to 200 bp and visualized using the IGV browser. For each dataset, we retrieved normalized read counts per base around each HCP TSS (−250 to +250 bp) with bwtool extract (version 1.0). We ranked the datasets based on the signal enrichment in gg-dko HCPs compared to all HCPs or inactive HCPs (defined as HCPs associated to genes with FPKM < 1 in WT ESCs).
Cell culture
Mouse embryonic stem cell line E14TG2a was purchased from ATCC (CRL-1821, lot 62909865). J1 and Dnmt-TKO ES cells were a gift from M. Okano. ES cells were cultured in Glutamax and sodium pyruvate supplemented DMEM (Gibco) containing 15% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS), 1000 U/ml LIF (Millipore), 0.1 mM non-essential amino acids, 50 U/ml penicillin and streptomycin and 0.1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol. Cells were adapted to gelatin without feeders after three passages. Immortalized MEFs were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 50 U/ml penicillin and streptomycin. All cells used in this study were tested negative for mycoplasma.
Generation of GFP reporter ESC lines
sgRNAs targeting the Dazl exon 3 or Mael exon 3 were cloned in the pSpCas9(BB)-2A-Puro (PX459) plasmid (Addgene #62988) by BbsI digestion. Donor plasmids to insert GFP in the Dazl or Mael genes were generated by assembling four DNA fragments using the Gibson Assembly Master Mix (NEB #E2611S): a 5’ homology arm, a p2A-NLSX2-sfGFP cassette amplified by PCR from plasmid addgene #63709, a 3’ homology arm, and a modified pUC19 backbone vector (addgene #63709). 5’ and 3’ homology arms were amplified by PCR from genomic DNA extracted from E14 ESCs. All DNA fragments were gel purified before the Gibson assembly reaction. Donor plasmids were co-transfected with the PX459 vector in ESCs using lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen #10696153). Twenty-four hours after transfection, the cells were selected with 2 μg/ml puromycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 48h, then plated at clonal density. Colonies were picked and expanded before checking the CRISPR-mediated insertion of the p2A-NLSx2-sfGFP sequence into the endogenous locus by PCR and sequencing.
Preparation of the lentiviral sgRNA library for the CRISPR screen
The Brie lentiviral gRNA pooled library (in lentiGuide-Puro backbone, addgene #73633) was amplified by electroporating 400 ng of the pooled library into 100 μl electrocompetent bacteria (STBL4-TM, Invitrogen #11635-018). Electroporated bacteria were cultivated in 10 mL of SOC for 1 h at 30°C, then plated on 4 bioassay plates (500 cm2, LB agar + antibiotic) for 16 h at 30°C before plasmid purification with the NucleoBond Xtra Maxi Plus kit (Macherey-Nagel #740416.50). Lentiviruses were produced by transient co-transfection of 293T cells with a three-plasmid combination. 293T cells were plated at 15 million cells/15 cm dish the day before the transfection, and were transfected with 24 μg gRNA lentiviral vectors, 20.2 μg psPax2 packaging plasmid and 4.8 μg pVSV envelope plasmid using Polyethylenimine (PEI) transfection reagent (Tebu-bio #07923966-2). The culture supernatant was collected 48 and 72 h after transfection and concentrated using lentiX concentrator (TakaraBio #631231). The viral aliquots were kept at -80°C until usage. To calculate viral titers, 250 × 10³ ESCs per well of a 6-well plate were transduced with serial dilutions of viral concentrate in the presence of 4 μg/ml polybrene. Twenty-four hours later, cells were selected with 1 μg/ml puromycin for 7 days and the numbers of puromycin resistant colonies were counted using a crystal violet staining and a typhoon machine (GE Healthcare).
CRISPR knockout screen
We first generated Dazl-GFP ESCs stably expressing Cas9 by transducing the Dazl-GFP clone with LentiCas9-blast lentiviruses (addgene #52962). Cells were selected with 10 μg/ml blasticidin for 10 days. To minimize clonal effects, the whole cellular pool was used to perform the screening. For the screening, we transduced 80 million Dazl-GFP ESCs expressing Cas9 with the Brie gRNA lentivirus library at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.3 using 4 μg/ml polybrene. Twenty-four hours later, the cells were selected with 1 μg/ml puromycin and 10 μg/ml blasticidin for 10 days with a medium change every 2 days. At day 10 post selection, 1/3 of cells were used as input and 2/3 were sorted by FACS to collect GFP+ cells using a FACSAria Fusion cell sorter (BD Biosciences). The screen was performed three times independently. Genomic DNA was extracted from sorted and input cells by phenol/chloroform extraction.
CRISPR knockout screen sequencing and analysis
The whole amount of DNA from sorted cells (∼300–500 ng) was used for PCR, whereas 100 μg DNA was used from input cells to ensure a 300× coverage (20 PCR reactions on 5 μg each). PCR was performed with DreamTaq polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a P5 primer and a unique P7 barcode primer with the following conditions: denaturation at 95°C for 3 min; 28 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 30 s, annealing at 55°C for 30 s and extension at 72°C for 45 s; final extension at 72°C for 10 min. The PCR products were verified on an agarose gel and the libraries were then purified using Agencourt AmpureXP beads (Beckman-Coulter) and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 4000 sequencer to produce 75 bp paired-end reads by Integragen SA, France. The sgRNA distribution and enrichment were analyzed with MAGeCK-VISPR. For hit selection, we first removed olfactory receptor genes and selected the top 100 hits with a P-value <0.05. We then added the top 20 hits from each analysis of two replicates, and removed genes with a fpkm <5 in our RNA-seq analysis of E14 ESCs.
Network analysis
Protein-protein interactions for the 76 selected candidates from the screen were performed using STRING v11.5. Interactions were computed using default parameters and network edges with a confidence score >0.4 were shown. Enrichment for mammalian phenotype was performed using the Enrichr gene set enrichment analysis tool (https://maayanlab.cloud/Enrichr).
Gene ontology analysis
For each gene ontology biological process, we calculated the enrichment and associated hypergeometric P-values of genes in each class compared to all genes. P-values were then adjusted with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing.
Validation of candidates
For each candidate, one sgRNA from the Brie library was cloned in the Cas9-sgRNA lentiviral vector lentiCRISPRv2 (Addgene #52961) by BsmBI digestion. Lentiviral preparation was performed as described for the CRISPR library. ESCs (Dazl-GFP clone, Mael-GFP clone) were transduced, plated at 50 × 10³ cells/35 mm dish and 24 h later cells were selected with 1 μg/ml puromycin. GFP+ cells were counted after 6 or 8 days of selection using a FACSCalibur (BD Biosciences) and data were analyzed with the FlowJo software. gRNA sequences used to validate candidates are listed in the Supplementary Table S2.
Generation of Usp7 knockout ESCs lines
A gRNA targeting the exon 3 of the Usp7 gene (GGTTGCCTCGGAGCGCCAAC) was cloned in the PX459 plasmid (Addgene #62988). Mouse ESCs E14TG2a were transfected with lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen #10696153) and selected for 48h by Puromycin (2 μg/ml). Single cells were sorted and plated at 1 cell/well in 96 well-plates. The clones were genotyped and tested for the presence of USP7 by Western blotting. We selected four independent Usp7 KO clones and, as control, four independent E14TG2a WT clones. The mutations induced by CRISPR-Cas9 were confirmed by sanger sequencing.
siRNA experiments
ON-TARGETplus SMART pool siRNAs (Horizon Discovery) were used to inhibit the expression of Usp7, Dnmt1, Erh or Shfm1. ON-TARGETplus Non-targeting Control siRNAs (Horizon Discovery) were used as negative control. ESCs cells were transfected with lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen #10696153) according to the manufacturer's instructions. 10 μl of lipofectamine 2000 diluted in 0.5 ml DMEM were mixed with 200 pmol siRNA in 0.5 ml DMEM and kept at room temperature for 20 min. The mix was added to a suspension of 1 ml ESCs (160 000 cells/ml) in ESC medium and plated on a 60 mm diameter petri dish. Medium was changed 6 h later and renewed every 24 h. 250 000 immortalized MEFs were transfected with 1000 pmol siRNA using the Neon electroporation system. Cells were harvested 48 or 72 h after siRNA transfection for protein and nucleic acid extraction. siRNA transfection experiments were performed in triplicates. The sequences of siRNAs are listed in the Supplementary Table S2.
5-Aza-dC treatment
5-Aza-2′-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) was purchased from Sigma (A3656) and prepared in water at 1 mg/ml stock concentration. ES cells or MEFs were treated with 0.5 μM final concentration of 5-aza-dC for 72 h with medium change every day.
Nucleic acid extraction
DNA and RNA samples were extracted using the NucleoSpin RNA purification kit and NucleoSpin RNA/DNA Buffer Set for parallel RNA and DNA purification (Macherey-Nagel) according to the manufacturer's instructions and quantified using a Qubit 2.0 fluorometer (Life Technologies).
RT-qPCR
RNAs were reverse transcribed with the Maxima first strand cDNA synthesis kit (Fisher Scientific #10282650) using a combination of oligo(dT) and random hexamer primers. RT-qPCR was performed with the KAPA SYBR FAST mix (Kapa Biosystems, KK4617) on a StepOnePlus realtime PCR system (Life Technologies) using the following PCR conditions: 95°C for 20 s, 40 cycles (95°C for 20 s, 64°C for 30 s), followed by a dissociation curve. The level of expression of each gene was calculated with the delta-delta Ct method and normalized with three housekeeping genes (B2m, Gusb, Rpl13a). The primer sequences are listed in Supplementary Table S2.
Cobra
100 ng of genomic DNA was bisulfite-converted with the EpiTect bisulfite kit (Qiagen). The target region in the Dazl promoter was amplified by touchdown PCR with the Platinum Taq DNA Polymerase (Invitrogen) using the following conditions: 20 cycles of 30s at 95°C, 30s at 58–48°C (with a 0.5°C decrease per cycle), 50 s at 72°C followed by 35 cycles of 30 s at 95°C, 30 s at 48°C, 50 s at 72°C. The PCR products were purified using the PCR cleanup kit (Macherey-Nagel). 50 ng of PCR product were digested by TaqαI (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and loaded on an agarose gel alongside 50 ng of undigested PCR product. The primer sequences are listed in Supplementary Table S2.
Transcriptome analysis by RNA-seq
RNA-seq was performed on RNAs from three independent siRNA experiments, as well as four independent WT and four independent Usp7-KO clones. Library preparation and sequencing was performed at the GenomEast platform. For siRNA experiments, RNA-seq libraries were prepared from 400 ng total RNA using the TruSeq Stranded Total RNA Library Prep Gold kit with Ribo-Zero rRNA removal and TruSeq RNA Single Indexes kits A and B (Illumina), according to the manufacturer's instructions. The final libraries were generated with 12 cycles of PCR amplification and purified using AMPure XP beads (Beckman-Coulter). For Usp7 WT and KO clones, RNA-Seq libraries were generated from 100 ng total RNA using the Illumina Stranded Total RNA Prep with Ribo-Zero Plus kit and IDT for Illumina RNA UD Indexes (Illumina), according to the manufacturer's instructions. The final libraries were generated with 13 cycles of PCR amplification and purified using SPRIselect beads (Beckman-Coulter). RNA-seq libraries were checked for quality and quantified using capillary electrophoresis, and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 4000 by single-end (1 × 50 bp) sequencing. Reads were mapped to the mouse mm10 genome with TopHat v2.0.13 with a RefSeq transcriptome index. Reads were counted in RefSeq genes with HTseq-count v0.7.2 (parameters –t exon –s reverse) and differentially expressed genes were analyzed using DESeq2 v1.20.0. Genes were called differentially expressed if they had an adjusted P-value < 0.001 and a fold change >2 (siRNA experiments) or >3 (KO cells). For data visualization, bigwig files were generated using bam2wig.py from the RSeQC package v2.6.4 (parameters -u -t 5000000000) and visualized in the IGV browser. The FPKM values were calculated using DESeq2. The expression of transposable elements was analyzed by counting unique and multiple-mapping reads in RepeatMasker TE families using featureCounts from the Rsubread package (v1.30.9) with the option to weight multi-mapping reads by the number of mapping sites (parameters countMultiMappingReads = TRUE, fraction = TRUE, useMetaFeatures = TRUE). Differential expression of TE families was analyzed using DESeq2 v1.20.0. Volcano plots were generated using VolcaNoseR (https://huygens.science.uva.nl/VolcaNoseR). Germline genes were defined as genes showing a clear biased expression in testis in the BioGPS database.
DNA methylome analysis by RRBS
RRBS libraries were prepared from 100 ng genomic DNA as described previously. Briefly, DNA was digested by MspI (Thermo Fisher Scientific), end-repaired and A-tailed with Klenow fragment exo- (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and ligated to methylated adapters with T4 DNA ligase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in Tango 1X buffer. DNA fragments ranging from 150 to 400 bp were selected by gel excision, purified using the MinElute gel extraction kit (Qiagen) and bisulfite-converted twice with the EpiTect bisulfite kit (Qiagen). The libraries were amplified using the Pfu Turbo Cx hotstart DNA polymerase (Agilent) with 12 PCR cycles, purified using Agencourt AmpureXP beads (Beckman-Coulter) and sequenced (2 × 75 bp) on an Illumina HiSeq 4000 by Integragen SA, France. Reads were trimmed with Trim Galore (v0.4.4) in –non_directional and –rrbs mode to remove adapter sequences, two bases filled in during end-repair of MspI restriction sites, and low-quality ends with a Phred score below 20. Sequencing reads were mapped to the mouse genome (mm10) with Bismark v0.18.2 with default parameters. A maximum of two mismatches and an insertion size for paired-end sequences between 30 and 400 bp were allowed. Methylation scores were extracted as the ratio of the number of Cs over the total number of Cs and Ts using the Bismark_methylation_extractor. CpG methylation ratios from both strands were combined and filtered for a minimum sequencing depth of 8X. The bisulfite conversion efficiency was estimated by calculating the C to T conversion at the end-repaired MspI CpG sites, which was greater than 99% (Supplementary Table S3).
Co-immunoprecipitation experiments
Total proteins were extracted in 50 mM Tris–HCI pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X100 and 2× Protease inhibitors (Pierce #78442) and briefly sonicated. The endogenous USP7 was immunoprecipitated by overnight incubation at 4°C of 2 mg protein lysate with 6 μg anti-USP7 antibody (Bethyl A300-033A) followed by 1h30 incubation with Protein A/G magnetic beads (Pierce #88802) at 4°C. Protein complexes were washed 5 times with 50 mM Tris–HCI pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X100, 2× protease inhibitors (Pierce #78442) and eluted in 2× SDS gel-loading buffer for 10 min at 95°C. Usp7-KO ES cells were used as negative controls for the immunoprecipitation experiments. For Western blot analysis, 15% of eluted proteins and 30 μg of input proteins were loaded on SDS-polyacrylamide gels.
IP/MS analysis of USP7 partners
For mass spectrometry analyses, we performed three independent immunoprecipitation experiments as described above on WT and Usp7-KO ES cells. Eluted proteins were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and analysed by nanoLC–MS/MS on a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were identified with the Mascot algorithm (version 2.6, Matrix Science) against the Swissprot database with the Mus musculus taxonomy (release 2021_03) using the software's decoy strategy. Mascot identifications were imported into the Proline 2.0 software and validated using the following settings: Mascot pretty rank ≤1, FDR ≤1% for PSM scores, FDR ≤1% for protein set scores. The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein. Statistical analysis of enriched proteins in WT compared to Usp7-KO cells was performed using R v4.0.3 and a homemade R package (IPinquiry4, https://github.com/) based on the msmsTests R package to process label-free LC-MS/MS data. The spectral counts were normalised using DESeq2 (median of ratios method) and EdgeR was used to perform a negative-binomial test and calculate the fold change and an adjusted P-value corrected by Benjamini–Hochberg for each protein. For this study, we defined significantly enriched proteins with a fold change >4 and an adjusted P-value <0.05.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation
ESCs were fixed with 1% formaldehyde for 10 min at room temperature and quenched by 125 mM glycine for 5 min. Cells were scraped in 5 ml cold PBS on ice, rinsed once, and cell pellets corresponding to 10 × 106 cells were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cell pellets were thawed on ice and lysed in 1 ml lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES–KOH pH 7.5, 140 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.5% NP40, 0.25% Triton X-100, 1× protease inhibitors) at 4°C for 10 min. The nuclei were washed in 10 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, 1× protease inhibitors (Pierce #78442), then resuspended in 500 μl shearing buffer (10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, 0.5% N-lauroylsarcosine, 0.1% Na-deoxycholate, 2× protease inhibitors) and sonicated with a Covaris E220 sonicator. The sonicated lysates were centrifuged at 16 000g for 15 min at 4°C to pellet cellular debris and the supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 ml LoBind Eppendorf tube. Chromatin was quantified using the Qubit dsDNA BR Assay Kit (Invitrogen #Q32853). 21 μg of chromatin were immunoprecipitated in 200 μl shearing buffer with 1% Triton X-100 overnight at 4°C with 2 μg anti-MGA antibody (Abcam #ab214814) or anti-PCGF6 antibody (Proteintech #24103-1-AP) or IgG control antibody (Millipore #CS200581) pre-incubated with 5 μl Blocker (Active Motif #37498). The immunocomplexes were collected on Protein G Agarose Columns (Active Motif #53039) for 3 h at 4°C, washed five times at 4°C with 900 μl wash Buffer (50 mM HEPES–KOH pH 7.6, 0.5 M LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.7% sodium deoxycholate, 1% NP-40) followed by 2 washes with 900 μl TE-plus-50 mM NaCl (10 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA), and eluted at 37°C for 5 min with Elution Buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM EDTA, 1% SDS). Input and ChIP samples were treated with 1 μl RNase A/T1 Mix (Thermo Scientific #EN0551) and reverse-crosslinked with 0.5% SDS and 130 ng/μl Proteinase K (Euromedex #EU0090-B) at 55°C for 1 h then at 65°C for 16 h. DNA was purified with the NucleoSpin Gel and PCR Clean up kit and Binding Buffer NTB (Macherey Nagel #740609). The enrichment of target sequences in the ChIP samples was determined by qPCR with the KAPA SYBR FAST mix (Kapa Biosystems #KK4617) on a StepOnePlus realtime PCR system (Applied Biosystem).
Western blotting
Whole cell extracts were prepared by cell lysis in RIPA buffer (Clinisciences) for 30 min on ice followed by brief sonication. 30 μg of protein extracts were run on precast mini Protean SDS-polyacrylamide normal or gradient (4–20%) gels (BioRad) and transferred to 0.45 or 0.2 μm nitrocellulose membranes using the BioRad Trans-blot Turbo Transfer System. The membranes were blocked in blocking solution (TBS, 5% milk, 0.1% Tween-20) for 1 h at room temperature. The membranes were incubated at 4°C O/N with the primary antibodies diluted in blocking solution, and then for 1 h at room temperature with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-mouse or -rabbit secondary antibodies (HealthcareDako P-0447 at 1/10 000 and Jackson Immunoresearch 111-035-003 at 1:100000) for ECL detection. For quantification of PRC1.6 proteins, the membranes were incubated with Alexa Fluor 680-conjugated secondary antibodies (Invitrogen A21057 and A21109 both at 1:20000) followed by fluorescence detection with a LI-COR Odyssey DLx imaging system and quantification with the LI-COR Empiria Studio software. For SHFM1 detection, 80 μg of protein extracts were run on a 16.5% Mini-PROTEAN Tris-Tricine Gel (BioRad #4563063) at 100 V for 4 h and transferred to a 0.2 μM PVDF Membrane (BioRad #1704156) using the TransBlot Turbo Transfer System (1.3 A, 25 V maximum, 4 min). After blocking (TBS, 5% milk, 0.05% tween-20) for 1 h at room temperature, the membrane was incubated at 4°C O/N with the primary antibody and the signal was revealed by ECL using the SuperSignal West Femto Maximum Sensitivity Substrate (Thermo Scientific #34094). The following primary antibodies were used in this study: USP7 (Bethyl #A300-033A, 1:15 000 in all figures except when indicated Abcam #ab109109, 1:500), ACTIN (Sigma #A2066, 1:4000), α-TUBULIN (Sigma #T9026, 1:10 000), LAMIN-B1 (Abcam #ab16048, 1:2000), VINCULIN (Abcam #ab129002, 1:10 000), DNMT1 (Cell Signaling Technology #5032, 1:1000), MGA (Abcam #ab214814, 1:667), PCGF6 (Abcam #ab200038, 1:1000), L3MBTL2 (Active Motif #39570, 1:500), E2F6 (Kerafast #LLF6-2, 1:500), MAX (Santa Cruz Biotechnology #sc-197, 1:200), RING1B (MBL #D139-3, 1:1000), ERH (Abcam #ab166620, 1:500), SHFM1 (Invitrogen #PA5-106312, 1:500). Uncropped images of membranes are provided in the Supplementary Figure S10.
RESULTS
Germline genes have a specific signature of chromatin marks in mouse ESCs
We previously identified a subset of 137 germline genes repressed by DNA methylation in mouse embryos. These genes, thereafter termed ‘gg-dko’ genes, have CG-rich promoters (intermediate or high CpG promoters, ICP or HCP respectively), gain promoter DNA methylation at implantation, and are upregulated in E8.5 Dnmt3a/3b double knockout (dko) embryos. Analysis of public RNA-seq data confirmed that ‘gg-dko’ genes are repressed in epiblast and somatic cells (dermal fibroblasts) and induced successively in germ cells (Supplementary Figure S1a). Interestingly, compared to post-implantation somatic cells, a number of ‘gg-dko’ genes show detectable expression in ESCs, morula and ICM (Supplementary Figure S1a), indicating that not all ‘gg-dko’ genes are fully repressed before DNA methylation establishment.
To begin understanding the mechanisms of epigenetic targeting of ‘gg-dko’ promoters, we investigated if they share specific sequence or chromatin features. To reduce biases caused by varying CG richness, we focused on ‘gg-dko’ genes with HCPs (n = 53) and compared them to all annotated HCPs (n = 13693) (Figure 1A). As expected, ‘gg-dko’ HCPs have strong DNA methylation in embryos compared to all HCPs (Figure 1B). Interestingly, we found that ‘gg-dko’ HCPs have significantly lower number of CGs and shorter CGIs compared to all HCPs (Figure 1C), suggesting that lower CpG density could intrinsically contribute to lower the protection against DNA methylation. To check if ‘gg-dko’ gene promoters have a specific signature of chromatin marks, we systematically analyzed public ChIP-seq data for 28 chromatin marks in mouse ESCs cultivated in serum, including histone methylation, acetylation, ubiquitination and histone variants (Supplementary Table S1). For each dataset, we calculated the enrichment in ‘gg-dko’ HCPs compared to all HCPs (n = 13693). This revealed that ‘gg-dko’ HCPs are enriched for the repressive marks H3K9me3, H3K27me3 and H2AK119ub, while the most depleted marks were the active marks H3K4me3, H3K9ac, H3K79me2 (Supplementary Figure S1b). To more specifically highlight the specificity of germline genes, we next compared ‘gg-dko’ HCPs to transcriptionally inactive HCPs only (n = 3309). This revealed that ‘gg dko’ HCPs are enriched for H3K9me3 and H2AK119ub and depleted for H3K4me3 and H3K9ac compared to other inactive HCPs, whereas H3K27me3 is no longer enriched indicating that it is rather a general signature of inactive HCPs (Figure 1D). We conclude that HCPs of germline genes are characterized by a lower CG density, as well as higher H3K9me3 and H2AK119ub and reduced H3K4me3 compared to other inactive HCPs, which may create an environment favorable for DNA methylation.
Chromatin signature of epigenetically repressed germline genes in mouse ES cells. (A) Diagram showing the selection of germline genes sensitive to DNA methylation in Dnmt3a/3b double knockout embryos (termed ‘gg-dko’). gg-dko with a HCPs were considered for the subsequent bioinformatic analysis. (B) Boxplots of mean CG methylation in E8.5 embryos in the promoters (–1000 to +500 bp from the TSS) of gg-dko genes with HCP compared to all HCPs. (C) Boxplots of the number of CGs (in –1000 to +500 bp from the TSS) and the size of predicted UCSC CpG island (CGI) associated with gg-dko genes with HCP compared to all HCPs. ****P-value < 0.0001; ***P-value < 0.001 (Mann–Whitney test). (D, E). Histone marks and chromatin bound proteins ranked by enrichment of ChIP-seq signal in gg-dko genes with HCP compared to all inactive HCPs in mESCs. The enrichment is represented as log2 fold change (FC). (F). Heatmaps showing the enrichment of ChIP-seq signal in mESCs in gg-dko genes with HCP compared to all inactive HCPs for enriched histone marks and chromatin bound proteins. The signal is represented as log2 fold change (FC) in –1000 to +1000 bp from the TSS. (G) Genome browser tracks of ChIP-seq signals in mESCs for histone marks and chromatin bound proteins on the promoters of germline genes Dazl and Mael and one HCP control gene Gapdh. UCSC RefSeq gene annotations are shown below the tracks.
Germline gene promoters are bound by a distinctive set of proteins in mouse ESCs
Next, we checked whether germline genes have a distinctive signature of chromatin-bound proteins by analyzing ChIP-seq datasets for 122 chromatin modifiers in mESCs (Supplementary Table S1). ‘gg-dko’ HCPs were compared either to all HCPs (Supplementary Figure S1c) or transcriptionally inactive HCPs (Figure 1E). Interestingly, known factors involved in DNA demethylation (PRDM14, TDG, TET1) were depleted in ‘gg-dko’ HCPs compared to all HCPs or inactive HCPs, as well as R-loops and G-quadruplex (G4) structures (Figure 1E and Supplementary Figure S1c, d), in agreement with their role in opposing DNA methylation of CpG islands. KDM2B, known to protect CpG islands against methylation, was also depleted, as well as the H3K9 demethylases KDM4C (Figure 1E). Strikingly, the PRC2 proteins EED, SUZ12, EZH2, JARID2, MTF2 and EPOP were strongly depleted in ‘gg-dko’ HCPs (Figure 1E and Supplementary Figure S1d), indicating that lack of PRC2 recruitment is a feature of germline genes like other non-canonical PRC1 targets.
Conversely, we found as expected a strong enrichment for the PRC1.6 members E2F6, MGA, L3MBTL2, PCGF6, RYBP, MAX, the PRC1.6 cofactor RIF1, the DNA methyltransferases DNMT3A and DNMT3B, as well as SETDB1, TRIM28 and CBX5 (Figure 1E, F and Supplementary Figure S1c, d). Interestingly, methyl-CpG binding domain (MBD) proteins were enriched in ‘gg-dko’ HCPs (MBD1B, MBD1A, MBD2A, MECP2 and MBD4) except MDB3 (Figure 1E, F), in agreement with MBD3 being the only MBD showing no visible preference for DNA methylation in ESCs. Among the top enriched factors, we also found the H3K9 methylase EHMT2/G9A and the H3K4 demethylase KDM5C known to be involved in the developmental silencing of germline genes, and SUMO2 known to participate in epigenetic repression in mouse ESCs. Additional enriched factors were DPPA2, DPPA4, ZFX and ZNF384 (Figure 1E, F). The Figure 1G shows binding profiles of enriched factors at the germline genes Dazl and Mael compared to the housekeeping gene Gapdh. This analysis shows that germline genes are bound by a specific set of chromatin modifiers and proteins in mESCs and identifies potential pathways involved in their epigenetic repression.
A CRISPR-cas9 screen reveals candidate repressors of germline genes in mouse ESCs
To define the factors causally involved in the silencing of germline genes, we developed a CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screening approach in mouse E14TG2a ESCs. To this end, we created a reporter cell line expressing GFP under the control of the endogenous promoter of the germline gene Dazl by inserting a 2A peptide and the GFP gene in the third exon of Dazl using CRISPR-mediated homology-directed repair (Figure 2A). We selected a clone with homozygous insertion of GFP in both Dazl alleles and validated the correct insertion of the p2A-NLS-GFP sequence into the Dazl locus by PCR and DNA sequencing (Supplementary Figure S2a–c). To validate the reporter clone, we treated it with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine and observed a strong induction of GFP fluorescence (Figure 2B). Furthermore, CRISPR-Cas9 knock-out of Dnmt1 in the Dazl-GFP clone induced GFP fluorescence concomitantly with demethylation of the Dazl promoter (Figure 2C), which validates the sensitivity of the reporter clone for CRISPR-Cas9 screening.
A genome-wide CRISPR screen identifies repressors of Dazl and Mael in mouse ES cells. (A) Knock-in strategy to insert the GFP gene into the third exon of the endogenous Dazl gene. (B) Treatment of the Dazl-GFP reporter line with 5-aza-dC (0.5 μM) for 2 days induces GFP fluorescence as measured by flow cytometry. Native E14 ES cells treated with 5-aza-dC were used as a control. (C) Infection of the Dazl-GFP reporter cell line with lentiviruses coding for Cas9 and a sgRNA targeting Dnmt1 induces GFP fluorescence as measured by flow cytometry after 10 days of puromycin selection. The reporter cell line infected with Cas9 without gRNA was used as negative control. The COBRA experiment shown on the right indicates demethylation of the Dazl promoter in the sgRNA Dnmt1 condition. (D) Principle of the genome-wide CRISPR Cas9 screen. Dazl-GFP cells expressing Cas9 were infected with a genome-wide lentiviral sgRNA library (Brie) and selected for 10 days before isolating GFP+ cells by flow cytometry and high-throughput sequencing of sgRNAs. (E) Results of the screen obtained by MAGeCK analysis. The graph shows the candidate genes ranked by their P-value. The names of the top candidate genes are indicated. (F) Top enriched GO terms of the candidate genes from the screen. (G) List of candidate genes from the screen grouped by molecular function. (H) Validation of candidate genes. Dazl-GFP ESCs were transduced with lentiviruses coding for Cas9 and a gRNA targeting each candidate gene. The graph shows the percentage of GFP+ cells measured by flow cytometry after 8 days of puromycin selection (mean ± SEM, n = 3 independent experiments). Asterisks indicate values measured at day 6 due to cell death. Lentiv2 is the control condition with a lentivirus coding for Cas9 without a gRNA. (I) Validation of candidate genes in Mael-GFP ESCs, performed as in h except that values were measured after 6 days of puromycin selection. (J) Percentage of GFP + cells following single or combined inactivation of PRC1.6 genes and Dnmt1 in Dazl-GFP ESCs (mean ± SEM, n = 3 independent experiments). Values were measured by flow cytometry at day 6 of puromycin selection.
We performed a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screen with the optimized Brie library containing 78 637 gRNAs targeting 19 674 mouse genes in lentiviral vectors. The Dazl-GFP clone was first transduced with a Cas9-Blasticidin lentivirus and selected for blasticidin resistance for 10 days. These cells were then transduced with the gRNA pooled library in lentiGuide-Puro and selected with puromycin for 10 days before isolating GFP + cells by cell sorting (Figure 2D, Supplementary Figure S2d). The screen was performed in triplicate and the enrichment of gRNAs in GFP + cells compared to input cells was analyzed by high throughput sequencing followed by statistical analysis using MAGeCK2.3. Among the top 10 ranked genes were Dnmt1 and several members of the PRC1.6 complex (Mga, Max, E2f6, Pcgf6 and Tfdp1) (Figure 2E), which validates the screening strategy. We selected the top 100 target genes enriched in the GFP-positive cells with a P-value <0.005. To account for possible experimental variations caused by gRNAs that target essential genes, we also selected the top 20 genes enriched in the analysis of 2 out of 3 replicates. Finally, we filtered out genes with low expression in mESCs, which led to a list of 76 candidate genes (Supplementary Table S4). The candidate genes from the screen were enriched in biological processes related to RNA metabolism, regulation of transcription, DNA methylation and chromatin organization (Figure 2F, Supplementary Table S4).
As expected, we recovered the regulators of maintenance DNA methylation Dnmt1, Uhrf1 and Ahcy, members of the PRC1.6 complex (Mga, Max, E2f6, Pcgf6, Tfdp1, Rybp, Ring1b/Rnf2), as well as Kdm5c and the H3K9 methylases Ehmt1/Glp and Ehmt2/G9a (Figure 2G). Among other genes, we recovered noteworthy candidate genes involved in chromatin regulation and DNA repair (Ncl, Usp7, Rif1, Shfm1/Sem1, Erh, Tipin), genes coding for DNA binding proteins and transcription regulators (e.g. E2f4, Rara), genes regulating RNA processing and modifications (e.g. Mettl14, Ddx42, Cnot8), and genes regulating protein modifications (e.g. Naa20, Naa25, Dohh, Cops3) (Figure 2G). Many factors that we found enriched at germline genes in Figure 1 were recovered in this list (PRC1.6 components, RIF1, KDM5C, EHMT2/G9a). Yet, genes coding for MBD proteins were not enriched in the screen, suggesting lack of repressive function. Unexpectedly, Setdb1 was also not recovered in the screen. To investigate this issue, we transduced Dazl-GFP cells with Cas9 and sgRNAs targeting Setdb1. We confirmed induction of GFP fluorescence by Setdb1 inactivation (Supplementary Figure S2e) but also observed cell lethality. This suggests that the absence of Setdb1 in the screen is either due to lethality of Setdb1 inactivation or technical reasons.
To characterize the network of germline gene repressors, we performed interaction analysis on the 76 genes and found tight and dense interactions between many candidates, the main core network being related to PRC1.6, DNA methylation and histone modifications (Supplementary Figure S3a). Furthermore, enrichment analysis of mammalian phenotypes associated with the candidate genes revealed an enrichment in abnormal embryogenesis (Supplementary Figure S3b, Supplementary Table S4). These results indicate that the identified candidates are members of networks of genes playing crucial roles in embryonic stages.
Validation of candidate genes from the screen
To validate the results of the screen, we transduced the Dazl-GFP clone with lentiviral particles coding for Cas9 and a sgRNA targeting one of 30 genes selected among the 76 hits from the screen. We also added L3mbtl2, another component of PRC1.6 that was not among the top hits. The transduced cells were selected with puromycin and GFP expression was analyzed by flow cytometry. gRNAs for 30 out of the 31 candidate genes induced GFP expression at varying levels, indicating a successful identification of Dazl repressors (Figure 2H and Supplementary Figure S2e). Cell death was observed after inactivation of several candidates such as Cops3, Uhrf1, Cnot8, Mettl14, Erh and Shfm1, which could explain the low ranking of some of these candidates.
Next, we sought to investigate if the candidates from the screen repress other germline genes than Dazl. To do so, we established an independent reporter system by inserting GFP under the control of the endogenous promoter of Mael (Supplementary Figure S4a–c), another germline genes whose repression in mESCs relies mainly on PRC1.6 rather than DNA methylation. Using the same lentiviral constructs, we tested the impact of knocking out candidate genes on GFP expression in this system. The inactivation of 17 out of 31 target genes resulted in GFP activation, including PRC1.6 components but also other candidates such as Usp7 that showed the strongest GFP activation, Rif1, Cops3, Mettl14, Naa20, Erh, Ddx42 and Shfm1 (Figure 2I and Supplementary Figure S4d), validating that these candidates are repressors of germline genes.
To investigate the cooperation between PRC1.6 and DNA methylation pathways, we performed double inactivation of PRC1.6 and Dnmt1 and monitored GFP expression in Dazl-GFP cells. The dual inactivation of PRC1.6 components Mga, E2f6, Pcgf6, Rybp or Ring1b with Dnmt1 resulted in increased induction of GFP expression compared to the single inactivation (Figure 2J), suggesting that PRC1.6 and DNA methylation act additively to repress germline genes. Collectively, these results validate the candidates from the screen and show that germline genes are repressed by multiple mechanisms that can act additively in mouse embryonic stem cells.
Usp7 is a potent repressor of germline genes in mouse ESCs
We then focused on one of the top candidates, Usp7, which had not yet been reported as a repressor of germline genes. Usp7 encodes a deubiquitinating enzyme involved in the regulation of DNA replication, DNA repair and gene expression. Interestingly, the USP7 protein is a known interactor of RING1B, PRC1.1 or PRC1.2/4 components and favors the integrity and chromatin binding of these complexes. Furthermore, USP7 interacts with DNMT1 and UHRF1 and regulates their ubiquitination status and recruitment to chromatin, however potential effects of USP7 in regulating DNA methylation remain controversial.
Using cell fractionation, we found that the USP7 protein is present both in the cytoplasm and nucleus of mESCs (Figure 3A). To study the role of Usp7 in transcription, we performed loss of function experiments by transfecting mESCs with siRNAs targeting Usp7 followed by RNA-seq. The efficiency of Usp7 knockdown (kd) was validated at the transcript level (Supplementary Figure S5a) and by Western blot (Figure 3B). Following a time-limited treatment, Usp7 knockdown did not impair cell proliferation (Supplementary Figure S5b). Furthermore, we confirmed the expected upregulation of Dazl and Mael transcripts in Usp7-kd cells (Figure 3C). RNA-seq identified 81 significantly up-regulated genes (fold change > 2; adjusted P-value < 0.001) upon Usp7 knockdown compared to non-targeting control siRNA (Figure 3D, Supplementary Table S5). Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis showed that these genes are exclusively enriched for biological processes related to germline functions (Figure 3E). Indeed, among the 81 upregulated genes, 35 are known germline-specific genes with 23 belonging to the ‘gg-dko’ list (Supplementary Table S5). To exclude any cell background bias, we also conducted siRNA mediated knockdown of Usp7 in J1 ESCs and observed a robust activation of Dazl and Mael expression in these cells at levels similar to E14TG2a ESCs (Figure 3C). Finally, to validate our results in ESCs in a more homogenous naïve state, we reanalyzed recent transcriptome data in Usp7-kd ESCs grown in 2i conditions and observed derepression of a highly overlapping set of germline genes (Supplementary Figure S5h, i), indicating that Usp7 also represses germline genes in mESCs under naïve conditions.
Usp7 is a potent repressor of germline genes in mouse ES cells. (A) Western blot showing the abundance of USP7 in nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions of mESCs. LAMINB1 and α-TUBULIN were used as controls. (B) Western blot of USP7 in mESCs transfected with non-targeting control (ctrl) siRNA or Usp7 siRNA. ACTIN was used as loading control. (C) Expression of germline genes Dazl and Mael measured by RT-qPCR in E14Tg2a and J1 mESCs upon siRNA knockdown of Usp7 (72 h). The values are shown as fold change relative to non-targeting control siRNA (mean ± SEM, n = 3 independent experiments, expression normalized to B2m, Gusb and Rpl13a). (D) Volcano plot showing differentially expressed genes in Usp7 siRNA mESCs. Significantly upregulated genes are highlighted in red. The names of the most upregulated germline genes are shown. (E) Top enriched gene ontology terms with their adjusted P-values associated with genes upregulated in Usp7 siRNA mESCs. (F) Western blot showing the absence of the USP7 protein in Usp7-/- mESC clones using two different USP7 antibodies. α-TUBULIN was used as a loading control. (G) Volcano plot showing differentially expressed genes in Usp7-/- mESCs. Significantly upregulated and downregulated genes are highlighted in red and blue, respectively. The names of the most upregulated germline genes are shown. (H) Top enriched gene ontology terms with their adjusted P-values associated with genes upregulated in Usp7-/- mESCs. (I) Expression levels (shown as FPKM values) of germline genes strongly upregulated in Usp7-/- compared to WT mESCs (mean ± SEM, n = 4 WT and 4 Usp7-/- clones). ***P< 0.001 (adjusted P-values from DESeq2).
To study the consequences of long-term inactivation of Usp7 in mESCs, we generated four independent Usp7-/- clones by CRISPR-Cas9. The successful inactivation of Usp7 in KO clones was validated by Western blot using two different antibodies (Figure 3F) and sanger sequencing (Supplementary Figure S6a). Usp7-/- clones showed normal expression of the pluripotency markers Pou5f1, Nanog and Sox2 but unusual morphologies of colonies (Supplementary Figure S6b, c). RNA-seq analysis in Usp7-/- clones compared to 4 WT clones identified 358 upregulated genes (Figure 3G, Supplementary Table S6) and GO analysis of these genes confirmed a strong enrichment for biological processes related to germline functions (Figure 3H, Supplementary Table S6). At least 68 germline genes were upregulated, many of which being among the top upregulated genes (Supplementary Table S6, Figure 3I). Furthermore, germline genes were strongly enriched among the genes commonly upregulated in Usp7-/- clones and Usp7-siRNA ESCs, indicating that they are the prime targets of Usp7 (Supplementary Figure S6d). Altogether these experiments demonstrate that Usp7 is a potent repressor of germline genes in mouse ESCs.
To test if Usp7 is also required to maintain the repression of germline genes in differentiated cells, we conducted siRNA-mediated knockdown of Usp7 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). In contrast to ESCs, no induction of germline genes was observed in Usp7-kd MEFs (Supplementary Figure S7a–c) even though germline genes can be strongly induced by the demethylating agent 5-Aza-2′-deoxycytidine in MEFs (Supplementary Figure S7c). This is reminiscent of results showing that E2F6 and MAX are required for the repression of germline genes in pluripotent cells but not in differentiated cells and indicates that Usp7 participates in the initiation but not long-term maintenance of silencing at germline genes.
USP7 interacts with and promotes the stability of PRC1.6 in mouse ESCs
To explore the mechanisms of action of USP7, we sought to identify its protein partners by immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry in mESCs. Using an antibody directed against the endogenous USP7 protein and Usp7-/- ESCs as control for the mass spectrometry, we identified 82 significantly enriched USP7 interactants in WT compared to Usp7-/- ESCs (Figure 4A, Supplementary Table S7). Among the top hits, we identified the DNA methyltransferase DNMT1 and at a lower rank its cofactor UHRF1 (Figure 4A, B). We also confirmed many proteins previously described as USP7 interactants in other cell types: USP11, GMPS, the E3 ubiquitin ligases TRIP12, RNF169, HUWE1, MARCH7, members of the PRC1.1 complex KDM2B, BCOR, BCORL1, PCGF1, TRIM27, the DNA replication proteins MCMBP and MCM3/5/7/6, as well as PPM1G, TMPO, PPIL4, DDX24, DHX40, CCDC55, FBXO38, RAD50 (Figure 4A, B).
USP7 interactome analysis identifies DNMT1 and members of the PRC1.6 complex as protein partners of USP7 in mouse ES cells. (A) Volcano plot of USP7 interaction partners in mESCs. Anti-USP7 immunoprecipitation was performed in WT and Usp7-/- ESCs (n = 3 independent experiments). Significantly enriched protein partners (log2FC > 2, padj < 0.05) are highlighted in red. (B) List of selected USP7 partners grouped by molecular function. (C) Validation of USP7 interaction with members of the PRC1.6 complex by co-immunoprecipitation in mESCs. Anti-USP7 immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed in WT and Usp7-/- mESCs, followed by Western blotting on input (IN) and IP fractions with the indicated antibodies. (D) Venn diagram comparing the genes upregulated by siRNA knockdown of Usp7 and Mga in mESCs (P-value: hypergeometric test). (E) Near-infrared fluorescence detection on the LI-COR-Odyssey imaging system of PRC1.6 proteins by western blot in WT and Usp7-/- mESC clones. α-TUBULIN blots were performed as loading controls. (F) Analysis of the binding of MGA (top) and PCGF6 (bottom) to the promoters of germline genes by ChIP-qPCR in Usp7-/- compared to WT mESCs (mean ± SEM, n = 4 clones per genotype, P-values: t-test). Primers in the Spop and Actb genes were used as negative controls.
Besides these known interactions, we establish that USP7 interacts with several members of the PRC1.6 complex in mouse ESCs: MGA, L3MBTL2, PCGF6, RING1A and RING1B (Figure 4A, B). We confirmed the interaction of endogenous USP7 with MGA, L3MBTL2 and RING1B in wild-type ESCs by immunoprecipitation followed by Western blotting, while no signal was detected in Usp7-/- ESCs (Figure 4C). This raises the hypothesis that Usp7 could influence the activity of PRC1.6.
To address this hypothesis, we compared the genes repressed by Usp7 and Mga using a published transcriptome of Mga-knockdown mouse ESCs. MGA is a major DNA-binding and scaffold protein of PRC1.6 and its inactivation leads to the destabilization of most PRC1.6 members, making Mga inhibition a good approach to probe PRC1.6 function. Knockdown of Mga by RNAi in ESCs resulted in the significant upregulation of 72 genes, 54 of which being known germline genes. Strikingly, 33 of these genes were in common with the genes passing the significance criteria in Usp7-kd ESCs (Figure 4D), and most Mga target genes showed a trend for upregulation in Usp7-kd and Usp7-KO ESCs (Supplementary Figure S8a). To investigate if USP7 regulates the abundance of PRC1.6, we performed Western blot of several PRC1.6 proteins in WT and Usp7-/- ESC clones. The results revealed unchanged levels of MAX and RING1B but reduced levels of PCGF6, MGA, L3MBTL2 and E2F6 in Usp7-/- compared to WT ESCs (Figure 4E and Supplementary Figure S8b). This is not associated with reduced transcript levels in Usp7-/- ESCs (Supplementary Figure S8b), suggesting that USP7 regulates the stability of these PRC1.6 proteins. To investigate if this leads to reduced PRC1.6 at germline genes, we carried out chromatin immunoprecipitation against PCGF6 and MGA and observed reduced binding of PCGF6 and MGA in the promoters of several germline genes in Usp7-/- ESCs (Figure 4F). Altogether, these results show that USP7 interacts with PRC1.6 and promotes the stability and presence at germline genes of key components of PRC1.6 in mESCs.
Usp7 triggers DNA methylation of germline genes
Considering that USP7 interacts with and has been proposed to regulate the activity of DNMT1 and UHRF1 (Figure 4A, B), we investigated if Usp7 regulates germline genes by modulating DNA methylation. First, we performed siRNA-mediated knockdown of Dnmt1 (Supplementary Figure S5a, b) to compare the genes upregulated in Usp7-kd and Dnmt1-kd ESCs. We confirmed reduced levels of the DNMT1 protein by Western blot (Supplementary Figure S5c) and strongly reduced levels of DNA methylation genome-wide by reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) in Dnmt1-kd ESCs (Supplementary Table S3, Supplementary Figure S5d-e). Of the 301 genes upregulated by Dnmt1 knockdown (Supplementary Figure S5f, Supplementary Table S5), only 15 genes were commonly upregulated in Usp7-kd and Dnmt1-kd ESCs (Figure 5A). Furthermore, the overlap is also very poor with the genes upregulated in Dnmt triple knockout (TKO) ESCs (Figure 5A). This suggests that Usp7 plays functions that are largely distinct from DNA methylation in mESCs. Indeed, Usp7 represses several germline genes that have low promoter DNA methylation in ESCs and are not upregulated in Dnmt1-kd ESCs (Supplementary Figure S5g). To check whether Usp7 regulates DNA methylation, we performed RRBS in Usp7-kd ESCs (Supplementary Table S3). Upon Usp7 knockdown by RNAi, global genome methylation was not affected in contrast to Dnmt1-kd cells (Figure 5B, Supplementary Figure S5d, e), and no differentially methylated regions were detected. Furthermore, up-regulated germline genes did not present any notable reduction of their promoter methylation in Usp7-kd cells, in contrast to Dnmt1-kd cells (Figure 5C). These data suggest that USP7-mediated repression is decoupled from DNA methylation at germline genes at least for short-term repression.
Regulation of DNA methylation of germline genes by Usp7 in mouse ES cells. (A) Venn diagram comparing the genes significantly upregulated in Usp7 siRNA, Dnmt1 siRNA and Dnmt-TKO mESCs. (B) Quantification of CG methylation by RRBS in mESCs transfected with Dnmt1 siRNA and Usp7 siRNA compared to non-targeting control (ctrl) siRNA. The graph shows methylation of CGs outside of CpG islands (non-CGI) or in CpG islands (CGI) (mean ± SEM, n = 3 independent experiments). (C) Heatmap representing the percentage of CG methylation measured by RRBS in the promoters (−1000 to + 500 bp from the TSS) of germline genes in mESCs transfected with Usp7 siRNA and Dnmt1 siRNA compared to ctrl siRNA. (D) Expression of Dazl, Mael and Usp7 quantified by RT-qPCR upon siRNA knockdown of Usp7 in WT and Dnmt-TKO J1 ESCs (72 h). The values are represented as a fold change relative to the siRNA ctrl in WT J1 (top) or to the corresponding siRNA ctrl (bottom) (mean ± SEM, n = 3 independent experiments). (E) Percentage of GFP + cells following single or combined inactivation of Dnmt1 and Usp7 in Dazl-GFP mESCs (mean ± SEM, n = 3 independent experiments). (F) Quantification of CG methylation by RRBS in Usp7-/- compared to WT mESC clones (n = 4 WT clones, n = 4 Usp7-/- clones). (G) RRBS profiles in the promoters of germline genes Mael and Btbd18 in WT and Usp7-/- clones. (H). Heatmap representing the percentage of CpG methylation measured by RRBS in the promoters (−1000 to +500 bp from the TSS) of germline genes in WT and Usp7-/- clones.
To verify that Usp7 regulates germline genes by DNA methylation independent mechanisms, we performed RNAi mediated inhibition of Usp7 in Dnmt TKO ESCs that lack DNA methylation. We detected an important and additive upregulation of the germline genes Dazl and Mael after Usp7 knockdown in TKO ESCs (Figure 5D), indicating that Usp7 does not require DNA methylation for repression. Furthermore, the combined inactivation of Dnmt1 and Usp7 in the Dazl-GFP reporter cell line resulted in additive induction of GFP expression compared to the single inactivation (Figure 5E). These results demonstrate that Usp7 can repress germline genes independently of DNA methylation in embryonic stem cells.
We then asked if the long-term absence of USP7 impairs DNA methylation of germline genes by performing RRBS in Usp7 WT and KO ESC clones (Supplementary Table S3). Our results did not indicate a global loss of DNA methylation in Usp7-/- ESCs, although we noted some clonal variability in the methylation levels of Usp7-/- clones (Figure 5F). Strikingly, we observed that promoter DNA methylation of several germline genes repressed by Usp7 was drastically reduced in Usp7-/- cells, as exemplified by Mael and Btbd18 (Figure 5G). Quantification of DNA methylation in the promoters of up-regulated germline genes showed that most of them undergo an important decrease of promoter DNA methylation in Usp7-/- compared to WT ESC clones (Figure 5H and Supplementary Figure S6e). Collectively these data indicate that Usp7 triggers in the long term the deposition of DNA methylation at germline gene promoters in ESCs. This appears as an endpoint rather than immediate cause of Usp7-mediated repression to sustain long term silencing.
Erh and shfm1 participate in the repression of germline genes and ERVs in mouse ESCs
We also wished to characterize the functions of two candidates from the screen: Erh and Shfm1 (also known as Sem1 or Dss1). These genes caught our attention because they encode short polypeptides (104 aa and 70 aa respectively) with high expression in ESCs and early embryos (Supplementary Figure S9a). Furthermore, their orthologs have been shown to mediate heterochromatin formation in yeasts. In S. pombe, the Erh ortholog Erh1 associates with Mmi1 to form the EMC complex essential for meiotic mRNA decay and assembly of facultative heterochromatin at meiotic genes. Shfm1 encodes a subunit of the 26S proteasome complex implicated in DNA damage repair. In S. cerevisiae, the Shfm1 ortholog maintains telomeric heterochromatin structure through modulation of histone modifications independently of the proteolytic function of the proteasome. These two candidates are therefore of particular interest to investigate their role in epigenetic repression in mammalian cells.
In the screen validation experiments, we noticed that the sgRNAs against Erh and Shfm1 induced lower cell counts. Furthermore, we were unable to generate KO clones for these genes by CRISPR-Cas9, suggesting that they may be essential for ESC viability. To circumvent the deleterious effect of Erh and Shfm1 inactivation, we performed knockdown by RNAi in ESCs (Figure 6A). The efficient knockdown of ERH and SHFM1 was confirmed by Western blot (Figure 6B). Confirming the CRISPR-Cas9 screen validation, both knockdowns had a rapid and strong negative effect on cell proliferation as measured by cell counting (Figure 6C). Furthermore, we confirmed the upregulation of Dazl and Mael expression upon knockdown of Erh or Shfm1 by RT-qPCR (Supplementary Figure S9b).
Erh and Shfm1 participate in the repression of germline genes and endogenous retroviruses in mouse ES cells. (A) RT-qPCR analysis of Erh, Shfm1, Dnmt1 and Usp7 expression in mESCs transfected with Erh siRNA or Shfm1 siRNA, shown as a fold change relative to non-targeting control (ctrl) siRNA (mean ± SEM, n = 3 independent experiments). (B) Western blot of ERH and SHFM1 in ESCs transfected with Erh siRNA or Shfm1 siRNA compared to non-targeting control (ctrl) siRNA and cells not transfected (n.t.). ACTIN was used as loading control. (C) Cell growth curves of ESCs transfected with Erh siRNA or Shfm1 siRNA compared to non-targeting control (ctrl) siRNA (mean of n = 3 independent experiments). (D, E) Volcano plot showing differentially expressed genes in Erh siRNA and Shfm1 siRNA mESCs. Significantly upregulated and downregulated genes are highlighted in red and blue, respectively. The names of selected upregulated germline genes are indicated. (F) Venn diagrams showing the intersection of genes upregulated in Erh siRNA and Shfm1 siRNA mESCs with gg-dko genes epigenetically repressed by DNA methylation (P-values: hypergeometric test). (G, H) Expression levels (shown as FPKM values) of selected germline genes upregulated in Erh siRNA and Shfm1 siRNA ESCs compared to non-targeting control (ctrl) siRNA (mean ± SEM, n = 3 independent experiments). (I). Heatmap showing changes in expression of 2C-specific genes upon siRNA mediated knockdown of Erh, Shfm1, Usp7 and Dnmt1 in mESCs. The values represent the fold change of expression (log2) relative to the non-targeting control siRNA. (J) Heatmap showing changes in expression of families of transposable elements upon siRNA knockdown of Erh, Shfm1, Usp7 and Dnmt1 in mESCs. The values represent the fold change of expression (log2) relative to the non-targeting control siRNA. *P< 0.05; **P< 0.01; ***P< 0.001 (adjusted P-values from DESeq2 analysis).
RNA-seq at 72 h post-transfection revealed 209 significantly upregulated genes (fold change > 2; adjusted P-value < 0.001) upon Erh knockdown and 1579 upon Shfm1 knockdown (Figure 6D, E, Supplementary Table S5). Strikingly, a very high proportion of genes upregulated in Erh-kd cells also passed the significance criteria in Shfm1-kd ESCs (121/209, P = 1.09 e-87, hypergeometric test) (Supplementary Figure S9c), suggesting that Erh and Shfm1 participate in overlapping pathways. GO enrichment analysis of upregulated genes revealed no significant term in Erh-kd ESCs (Supplementary Table S5), but numerous terms related to development, regulation of cell division, apoptosis and reproduction in Shfm1-Kd ESCs (Supplementary Figure S9d, Supplementary Table S5). When focusing on germline genes, we found that the genes upregulated in Erh-kd and Shfm1-kd ESCs significantly overlap with the ‘gg-dko’ list (Figure 6F). Furthermore, at least 18 and 61 known germline genes were upregulated in Erh-kd and Shfm1-kd ESCs respectively (Supplementary Table S5, see examples in Figure 6G, H). These results indicate that Erh and Shfm1 participate in the repression of many germline genes, but the underlying mechanisms are yet to be identified. A role for ERH in silencing meiotic genes was also recently observed in human fibroblasts, indicating a conserved role of ERH in silencing germline genes from S. Pombe to higher eukaryotes.
As epigenetic regulators in embryonic cells, we wondered whether the studied candidates also repress genes specific of two-cell stage embryos (2C-genes) or transposable elements (TEs). We found that many 2C-genes such as Zscan4 genes, Usp17-like genes and Dux are significantly upregulated by Shfm1 knockdown, while minor effects were seen after Erh knockdown and no effects were observed after Dnmt1 and Usp7 knockdown (Figure 6I). Next, we quantified TE expression by counting reads in RepeatMasker annotations. Strikingly, Shfm1 knockdown led to a very significant upregulation of IAPs and other ERVK families, as well as ERVL (RLTR35B_MM, MERVL-int, MT2_Mm) and L1Md elements (Figure 6J, Supplementary Table S8, Supplementary Figure S9e). In a similar way and as expected, several IAP and other ERVK families were also significantly upregulated upon Dnmt1 knockdown (Figure 6J). In contrast, only a few TE families were modestly upregulated upon Erh knockdown (Figure 6J) and no significant effects were observed upon Usp7 knockdown. We nevertheless observed a slight upregulation of MERVL-int elements in Usp7-kd ESCs as previously shown (Figure 6J). In summary, our results describe for the first time Shfm1 as a broad repressor involved in the silencing of germline genes, 2C-genes and ERVs in mouse ESCs.
DISCUSSION
During development, germline genes are repressed by members of the polycomb group complex PRC1.6 and histone modifications, and are subsequently targeted by DNA methylation during the de novo methylation wave, which leads to their long-term repression in somatic lineages. Due to this particularity and because most CG-rich promoters are protected from DNA methylation in development, germline genes represent a paradigm for investigating the mechanisms of epigenetic targeting and repression in mammalian cells. Yet our understanding of these mechanisms remains incomplete. In this study, we used ES cells cultured in medium supplemented with serum and LIF as an experimental model to explore novel mechanisms involved in the repression of germline genes.
First, we performed a meta-analysis for ChIP-seq datasets of histone modifications and proteins to identify factors enriched or depleted at the CG-rich promoters of germline genes. In agreement with previous studies, we highlight a specific combination of histone marks on germline gene CG-rich promoters with enrichment of H3K9me3, H2AK119ub1, and depletion of H3K4me3. The retrieving of PRC1.6 members, SETDB1, G9A and DNMTs among the top enriched factors validates this approach. In contrast, we show that germline genes are depleted for factors involved in promoting DNA hypomethylation such as KDM2B, E2F1, R-loops, PRDM14, TDG and TET1. Interestingly, DPPA2 and DPPA4, recently identified as protectors of bivalent genes against DNA methylation, were not significantly depleted in germline gene promoters. To complement our meta-analysis approach in an unbiased way, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screening based on the activity of the endogenous promoter of the germline gene Dazl. This allows to identify factors causally required for germline gene repression. It should nevertheless be emphasized that this approach has limitations as it might miss candidates due to redundancy, lethality of KO cells or ineffective gRNAs. Indeed, Setdb1 was not ranked among the top candidates, probably because of the lethality of Setdb1-KO ESCs. Likewise, we failed to identify Atf7ip as a top candidate, a partner of Setdb1 recently shown to repress germline genes in mouse and human ES cells.
Based on the results of our meta-analysis and CRISPR-Cas9 screen, we propose that at least four main molecular routes cooperate to limit the expression of germline genes in ESCs at the chromatin level: repression by the polycomb complex PRC1.6, deposition of H3K9 methylation (by Setdb1 and G9a), removal of H3K4 methylation (by Kdm5c) and facilitation of DNA methylation. The underlying sequence of germline gene promoters, notably the lower number of CGs and shorter CGIs compared to all HCPs, may also contribute to lower the protection against DNA methylation. Interestingly, we also show that the promoters of germline genes are depleted of PRC2 compared to other inactive promoters. Additionally, despite the fact that the deletion of PRC2 components is tolerated in mESCs, the screen did not retrieve members of the PRC2 complex among the top hits. This shows that PRC2 does not contribute to germline gene repression, in agreement with previous studies showing that the deletion in ESCs of Eed, the PRC2 subunit essential for H3K27me3 deposition, has no effect on germline genes. Given the documented antagonism between PRC2 and DNA methylation, it is also possible that the depletion of PRC2 contributes to DNA methylation at germline genes.
Besides chromatin factors, the screen also identified several genes involved in RNA processing, leading to the speculation that the expression of germline genes could also be controlled at the RNA level. Interestingly, one of these factors, Mettl14, catalyzes RNA methylation of ERV RNAs to promote their destabilization, suggesting that similar mechanisms could limit the abundance of RNA transcripts from germline genes especially during early mammalian development when the chromatin-based control is more relaxed.
Most importantly, our study led to the identification of novel factors with no previously known functions in germline gene regulation. We identified USP7, a deubiquitinating enzyme, as a potent repressor of germline genes in mouse ESCs. Despite the various described roles of USP7, we show that germline genes are its principal targets in ESCs. USP7 has been reported to interact with the PRC1.1 complex and to promote H2AK119ub1 deposition by de-ubiquitinating and stabilizing RING1B. Our proteomics analysis, although confirming an interaction between USP7 and PRC1.1, shows that it also interacts with PRC1.6 subunits in mouse ESCs. Furthermore, we show that USP7 and PRC1.6 repress an overlapping set of germline genes, and that USP7 promotes the stability and recruitment of PRC1.6 to chromatin. These results suggest that USP7 participates in the repression of germline genes via regulating PRC1.6 activity, most probably by counteracting the ubiquitination of some PRC1.6 proteins. Interestingly, very recent studies showed that MGA, L3MBTL2 and PCGF6 are also destabilized upon USP7 inactivation in human cancer cell lines, indicating conserved USP7 function through mammalian evolution. We note however that substantial amounts of PRC1.6 remain at some germ line genes despite strong upregulation of these genes in Usp7-/- ESCs (Figure 4F). This suggests that USP7 might not only regulate the abundance of PRC1.6 but also its capacity to induce repression at chromatin, or represses germline genes by additional mechanisms yet to be identified.
USP7 has been suggested to regulate DNMT1/UHRF1 stability or recruitment to chromatin, and to impact maintenance of DNA methylation. While we showed an interaction of USP7 with DNMT1 and UHRF1, our results suggest no major role of Usp7 in global genome methylation in ESCs, in agreement with other findings. Therefore, it remains to be determined in which physiological context the reported regulation of DNMT1/UHRF1 by USP7 is critical for global DNA methylation maintenance. Nevertheless, we demonstrate a role of USP7 in promoting DNA methylation of germline gene promoters. It is possible that USP7 regulates DNMT1 activity specifically at germline genes, or alternatively USP7 could indirectly favor the recruitment of DNA methylation by PRC1.6.
We identify Erh and Shfm1 as novel genes involved in the repression of germline genes in mouse ESCs. ERH participates in the repression of meiotic genes in S. pombe and recently, the human ERH gene has also been shown to participate in the repression of meiotic genes in human fibroblasts. The identification of ERH in our study highlights a conservation of its role as a repressor of meiotic and germline genes from S. pombe to higher eukaryotes. The Erh gene encodes a small protein highly conserved in metazoans with enigmatic functions. ERH orthologs can be tracked to fission yeasts including S. pombe and S. japonicus but not S. cerevisea which lacks H3K9 methylation. Interestingly, human ERH has been predicted to be a partner of SETDB1 and a recent study showed that it helps to maintain heterochromatic H3K9me3 in human cells. These data suggest that ERH may repress germline genes in ESCs partly by promoting H3K9me3. The underlying mechanisms connecting SHFM1 to the repression of germline genes, 2C genes and TEs also remain to be investigated. SHFM1 is a conserved, intrinsically disordered small protein with functions in protein degradation, DNA repair, transcription, and mRNA export. Although SHFM1 is a subunit of the 26S proteasome, several studies show that SHFM1 has proteasome independent functions. In particular, SHFM1 is a component of the Three prime repair exonuclease 2 (TREX-2) complex present at nuclear pore complexes and implicated in mRNA export and chromatin positioning in the nucleus. Given the broad function of the Shfm1 gene in the repression of genes and ERVs, it is plausible that Shfm1 also regulates global heterochromatin maintenance through histone or DNA methylation. Furthermore the involvement of Shfm1 in the repression of 2C-genes and MERVL elements, which are markers of the totipotent 2-cell stage embryo, suggests important roles in controlling totipotency in early development.
Finally, an intriguing observation is the overlap between factors limiting the expression of germline genes and the TE silencing machinery. Indeed, in addition to SHFM1, many repressors of germline genes described in the literature or identified in this study also repress transposable elements such as SETDB1, G9A, RIF1, METTL14 and USP7. This may underlie an evolutionary convergence between mechanisms repressing harmful TEs and germline genes in mammalian somatic cells.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The sequencing data generated in this study (RRBS and RNA-seq) have been deposited in the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under the accession number GSE192556. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD030666. The following deposited datasets were also used: RNA-seq in E14 ESCs in serum and 2i (GSE77420), RNA-seq in morula, ICM and E6.5 embryos (GSE98150), RNA-seq and WGBS in E8.5 mouse embryos (GSE130735), RNA-seq in mouse dermal fibroblasts (GSE175615), RNA-seq in mouse PGCs (GSE76958), sperm (GSE49624) and oocytes (GSE56697), RNA-seq of Mga siRNA ESCs (GSE84480), RNA-seq of Usp7 siRNA ESCs in 2i medium (GSE149341), RNA-seq of Dnmt TKO ESCs (GSE67867). The list of ChIP-seq datasets used in the Figure 1 is provided in the Supplementary Table S1.
Supplementary Material
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online.
FUNDING
European Research Council [ERC Consolidator grant 615371]; Agence Nationale de la Recherche; Ligue contre le Cancer; ITI InnoVec of the University of Strasbourg; CNRS; Inserm [IdEx ANR-10-IDEX-0002, SFRI ANR-20-SFRI-0012]; the mass spectrometry instrumentation was funded by the University of Strasbourg [IdEx Equipement mi-lourd 2015]; GenomEast is a member of the ‘France Genomique’ consortium [ANR-10-INBS-0009]. Funding for open access charge: CNRS funds.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
Notes
Present address: Hala Al Adhami, IEO, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, Department of Experimental Oncology, Via Adamello 16, 20139 Milan, Italy.
Present address: Anaïs Flore Bardet, Institute of Genetics and Molecular and Cellular Biology (IGBMC), CNRS UMR7104, INSERM U1258, University of Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PMID 34497417 — Inter-cellular CRISPR screens reveal regulators of cancer cell phagocytosis.
Nature (2021) · https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34497417/

Inter-cellular CRISPR screens reveal regulators of cancer cell phagocytosis
Monoclonal antibody therapies targeting tumor antigens drive cancer cell elimination in large part by triggering macrophage phagocytosis of cancer cells. However, cancer cells evade phagocytosis using mechanisms that are incompletely understood. Here we develop a platform for unbiased identification of factors that impede antibody-dependent cellular phagocytosis (ADCP) using complementary genome-wide CRISPR knockout and overexpression screens in both cancer cells and macrophages. In cancer cells, beyond known factors such as CD47, we identify many regulators of susceptibility to ADCP, including the poorly characterized enzyme adipocyte plasma membrane-associated protein (APMAP). We find that loss of APMAP synergizes with tumour antigen-targeting monoclonal antibodies and/or CD47-blocking monoclonal antibodies to drive markedly increased phagocytosis across a wide range of cancer cell types, including those that are otherwise resistant to ADCP. Additionally, we show that APMAP loss synergizes with several different tumour-targeting monoclonal antibodies to inhibit tumour growth in mice. Using genome-wide counterscreens in macrophages, we find that the G-protein-coupled receptor GPR84 mediates enhanced phagocytosis of APMAP-deficient cancer cells. This work reveals a cancer-intrinsic regulator of susceptibility to antibody-driven phagocytosis and, more broadly, expands our knowledge of the mechanisms governing cancer resistance to macrophage phagocytosis.
To identify cancer-intrinsic regulators of ADCP, we subjected Ramos lymphoma cells carrying a genome-wide CRISPR knockout library to multiple rounds of antibody-dependent killing by macrophages (Fig. 1a, Extended Data Fig. 1a–d, Supplementary Table 1, Supplementary Note 1). The top sensitizing hits in this screen included genes encoding the known anti-phagocytic factor CD47, the CD47-modifying enzyme QPCTL and several enzymes involved in synthesis of sialic acids, which are known to protect cancer cells against innate immune cell killing (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 1e, f), validating the ability of this screening platform to identify ADCP regulators. The target of the antibody used to drive ADCP, CD20 (also known as MS4A1), was recovered as the top protective hit (Fig. 1b). Beyond these known regulators, we identified many genes not previously linked to phagocytosis regulation, including the poorly characterized gene APMAP (Fig. 1b, Supplementary Table 2). We validated the phenotypes for these genes in both higher-coverage batch retest screens (Extended Data Fig. 1g–i, Supplementary Table 3) and, for several genes, in competitive growth assays in the presence of anti-CD20 and macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 1j).
We next used CRISPR activation (CRISPRa) screens to uncover additional regulators of ADCP that are not endogenously expressed at high levels in Ramos cells (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 2a, Supplementary Note 2). As we had identified CD47 as the most potent anti-phagocytic factor expressed by Ramos cells (Fig. 1b), we also included anti-CD47 blocking antibodies (Extended Data Fig. 1a), reasoning that blocking CD47 would improve detection of additional anti-phagocytic factors (Fig. 1c). This screen revealed a large number of both anti-phagocytic hits (that is, genes whose overexpression increases cell survival upon incubation with macrophages and anti-CD20 and anti-CD47 antibodies) and pro-phagocytic hits (Fig. 1d, Extended Data Fig. 2b, Supplementary Table 4). As expected, CD20 scored as a strong pro-phagocytic hit (Fig. 1d). Gene ontology enrichment analysis of the anti-phagocytic hits from the CRISPRa screen, as well as the combined list of anti-phagocytic hits from both the CRISPR knockout and CRISPRa screens (Fig. 1e), revealed a strong enrichment for genes involved in sialic acid biosynthesis and/or protein sialylation (Extended Data Fig. 2c).
Notably, several of the top hit genes are oncogenes (GFI1 and MUC12), cancer antigens (for example, MUC1 and LRRC15), drivers of metastasis (for example, MUC21, PODXL and SMAGP) or negative prognostic indicators in cancer (for example, C5AR1), but have unclear functions in tumorigenesis and have not been previously implicated in regulation of phagocytosis. We validated nine of these genes as regulators of susceptibility to ADCP by incubating pHrodo red-labelled Ramos CRISPRa cells expressing single guide RNAs (sgRNAs) targeting each gene and monitoring the time-dependent increase in red fluorescence upon target cell internalization and acidification (Fig. 1f, Extended Data Fig. 2d). For SMAGP, which encodes a poorly characterized cell-surface glycoprotein and was among the top hits in the CRISPRa screen, we additionally showed that expression of Flag-tagged SMAGP under the strong EF1α promoter was sufficient to protect Ramos cells against ADCP (Extended Data Fig. 2e). We next tested whether the Ramos CRISPRa screen dataset could be used to predict genes that protect other cancer cell lines against ADCP on the basis of their high expression. We noted that SMAGP is expressed at high levels in RKO colon cancer cells (Extended Data Fig. 2f). We transduced RKO cells with Cas9 and sgRNAs targeting SMAGP, and found that deletion of SMAGP strongly sensitized RKO-Cas9 cells to phagocytosis in the presence of anti-CD47 antibodies (Fig. 1g). Thus, our CRISPRa screening approach enables identification of anti-phagocytic factors that are expressed at high levels in only a subset of cell lines.
To determine the stage of antibody-dependent phagocytosis that is affected by overexpression of these hits, we developed an imaging-based cell adhesion assay to assess target cell binding in the absence of phagocytosis, by inhibiting actin polymerization with cytochalasin D (Fig. 1h). We found that overexpression of a subset of hits, including the genes encoding the mucins MUC1, MUC12 and MUC21, prevented macrophages from binding Ramos target cells in the presence of rituximab, consistent with the reported ability of mucin overexpression to sterically occlude the cancer cell surface (Fig. 1h). Overexpression of most of these genes also decreased binding of two distinct antibodies—anti-CD20 and anti-CD45—to the cell surface, whereas overexpression of GFI1—which encodes a transcriptional repressor—specifically reduced anti-CD20 binding (Extended Data Fig. 2g, h). By contrast, overexpression of several genes, including SMAGP and ST6GALNAC1, did not affect binding of target cells to macrophages or decrease antibody binding (Fig. 1h, Extended Data Fig. 2g, h). Thus our screening platform identified genes that enable cancer evasion of ADCP via diverse mechanisms.
APMAP loss sensitizes lymphoma cells to ADCP
The poorly characterized gene APMAP was among the strongest modifiers of sensitivity to phagocytosis identified in both the Ramos CRISPR knockout screen (Fig. 1b) and a second, genome-wide ADCP screen we conducted in Karpas-299 T lymphoma cells using anti-CD30 antibodies (Fig. 1i, Extended Data Fig. 2i), suggesting an important role for APMAP in cancer evasion of phagocytosis. APMAP is ubiquitously expressed in human tissue types and in all cell lines of the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia, and is overexpressed in several malignancies (Extended Data Fig. 2j). Nonetheless, APMAP is not essential for growth under standard culture conditions in any of the 789 lines profiled in DepMap (Extended Data Fig. 2k) or for mouse viability, implying that targeting APMAP would not exhibit broad toxicity. In individual assays, APMAP-knockout (APMAPKO) Ramos cells were significantly sensitized to ADCP in the presence of anti-CD20 and human macrophages, even more than CD47-knockout (CD47KO) cells (Fig. 1j). Unlike CD47KO cells, APMAPKO Ramos cells were not more susceptible to phagocytosis than SafeKO control cells in the absence of antibodies (Fig. 2a, b). APMAP loss in Ramos cells thus synergizes with tumour antigen-targeting antibodies to drive phagocytosis but does not increase uptake of unopsonized cells. We further tested whether APMAP would enhance the effects of CD47 blockade. Indeed, in two screens with a sublibrary containing approximately 3,100 genes enriched for membrane proteins, aimed at identifying genes that further sensitize cells to ADCP when CD47 is deleted or blocked, APMAP was the top hit (Extended Data Fig. 3a–c, Supplementary Table 5). Additionally, in a genome-wide screen for susceptibility to phagocytosis driven by anti-CD47 antibodies in Karpas-299 cells, APMAP was among the top hits (Fig. 2c). In quantitative live-cell imaging experiments, we confirmed that APMAP-deficient Ramos cells were significantly more sensitive to phagocytosis in the presence of CD47-blocking antibodies than control cells using either J774 macrophages (Fig. 2d) or primary human macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 3d). APMAP loss also enhanced ADCP induced by combined anti-CD20 and anti-CD47 treatment (Fig. 2e). In a series of additional experiments, we confirmed that APMAP loss specifically sensitized cancer cells to phagocytosis without affecting expression of known pro- or anti-phagocytic signals, binding of tumour-targeting antibodies or sensitivity to a panel of other cytotoxic agents (see Extended Data Figs. 3e, f, 4, Supplementary Note 3).
APMAP contains a short cytosolic domain, a single transmembrane domain, and a predicted extracellular or endoplasmic reticulum-lumenal domain with sequence homology to the paraoxonase family of antioxidant enzymes (Fig. 2f). To assess the contributions of each domain to the function of APMAP in protecting cancer cells against phagocytosis, we transduced APMAPKO Ramos cells with constructs encoding a series of Flag-tagged APMAP alleles. Full-length Flag-tagged wild-type APMAP restored the ability of APMAPKO Ramos cells to suppress phagocytosis (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5a, b). Truncation of the cytosolic domain, replacement of the transmembrane domain with that of unrelated endoplasmic reticulum proteins, or mutation of the two N-glycosylated residues of APMAP did not affect APMAP function in regulation of ADCP (Extended Data Fig. 5c–f). By contrast, mutation of a predicted calcium-binding residue expected to be required for catalysis on the basis of homology to PON1 (Fig. 2f) abrogated APMAP function in ADCP (Fig. 2g). Nonetheless, this mutant exhibited a similar expression level (Extended Data Fig. 5b) and localization pattern (Extended Data Fig. 5a) as wild-type APMAP. Thus, the predicted catalytic activity of APMAP, contained in its endoplasmic reticulum-lumenal or extracellular domain, is required for suppression of phagocytosis.
APMAP limits ADCP of diverse cancer cell lines
To investigate whether the role for APMAP in protecting cancer cells against phagocytosis is conserved in other tumour types, we examined the sensitivity to phagocytosis of eight additional cancer cell lines derived from diverse lineages, each of which expresses APMAP and CD47 at moderate levels (Extended Data Fig. 6a, b). For each line, we found expression of APMAP-targeting sgRNAs greatly sensitized cells to phagocytosis driven by anti-CD47 (Fig. 3a, Extended Data Fig. 6c, d). This is notable, as several of the cell lines (for example, HCT-116 and RKO) were highly resistant to CD47 blockade-induced phagocytosis. Additionally, APMAP loss sensitized four EGFR+ cell lines to ADCP driven by anti-EGFR (cetuximab), including cell lines (NCI-H23 and OVCAR8) that were otherwise insensitive to cetuximab (Extended Data Fig. 6e, f).
APMAP synergy with tumour antigen antibodies
We examined the effect of APMAP loss on tumour growth in four mouse models. In the first two models, Ramos lymphoma or NCI-H82 small cell lung cancer cells were injected into the flanks of NSG mice, which lack adaptive immune cells but contain functional macrophages. After allowing tumours to develop, mice were treated with CD47-blocking antibodies or phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) control (Fig. 3b, Extended Data Fig. 6g). As expected, CD47 blockade inhibited development of both Ramos (Extended Data Fig. 6g–i) and NCI-H82 (Fig. 3b, Extended Data Fig. 6i) tumours. Of note, APMAP deficiency enhanced the effect of CD47 blockade on inhibition of the growth of both tumour types, but had no effect in the absence of CD47 blockade (Fig. 3b, Extended Data Fig. 6g). In a third model, we found that APMAP loss both increased macrophage infiltration (Extended Data Fig. 6j) and enhanced the effect of rituximab on Ramos tumours (Fig. 3c). Finally, we injected mouse B16-F10 melanoma cells into syngeneic C57BL/6 mice and treated with anti-TRP1 tumour-targeting antibodies. Tumours lacking APMAP were significantly sensitized to anti-TRP1 treatment (Extended Data Fig. 6lk–m). Thus, while further studies are required to assess the therapeutic potential of targeting APMAP, these experiments demonstrated that APMAP loss enhances the effects of multiple tumour-targeting antibodies on inhibition of tumour growth in mice.
Macrophage GPR84 promotes ADCP of APMAPKO cells
We hypothesized that APMAP loss enhances cancer cell uptake by modulating phagocytic signalling through a macrophage receptor. To identify candidate receptors, we conducted a complementary fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)-based screen, this time with the CRISPR knockout library in macrophages, and used cancer cells as phagocytic targets to identify both general regulators of ADCP and specific mediators of enhanced ADCP of APMAPKO cells (Supplementary Note 4 on optimization of macrophage CRISPR screening, Extended Data Fig. 7, Supplementary Table 6). After incubating the genome-wide knockout macrophage pool with anti-CD20-opsonized SafeKO and APMAPKO Ramos cells (each bearing a distinct fluorescent label), we separated macrophages that had phagocytosed each target cell type (Fig. 4a). We deep sequenced the sgRNAs in each sorted population and performed two key comparisons. First, by comparing the double-negative and far-red single-positive populations, we identified genes required for uptake of APMAPKO cells, which included key actin-regulators and signalling factors required for phagocytosis (Fig. 4b, Supplementary Table 7). Second, we compared the two single-positive populations to identify genes selectively required for uptake of APMAPKO cells. This analysis revealed two genes required specifically for phagocytosis of APMAPKO cells: GPR84 and GNB2 (Fig. 4c, Supplementary Table 8). G-protein-coupled receptor 84 (GPR84) is a macrophage-specific pro-inflammatory G-protein-coupled receptor previously shown to stimulate phagocytosis when activated by lipid agonists, and G protein subunit-β2 (GNB2) is a heterotrimeric Gβ protein subunit. Across several recent single-cell RNA-sequencing studies of human tumours, we found that GPR84 was expressed specifically in tumour-associated macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 8).
We validated that GPR84 is required for enhanced ADCP of APMAPKO cells using time-lapse imaging assays; deletion of GPR84 abolished enhanced uptake of APMAPKO cells by human or mouse macrophages, but did not diminish uptake of SafeKO cells or CD47KO cells (Fig. 4d, Extended Data Fig. 9a, b). To identify additional genes required for pro-phagocytic signalling downstream of GPR84, we conducted a higher-coverage screen using a 2,208-gene phagocytosis regulator-enriched sublibrary, which revealed several additional genes selectively required for uptake of APMAPKO cells: GNAI2, which encodes a Gαi subunit, and PREX1, which encodes phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate-dependent Rac exchanger 1, a Rac guanine-exchange factor (GEF) (Extended Data Fig. 9c–f, Supplementary Table 8). We validated that both GNB2 and PREX1 are required for enhanced ADCP of APMAPKO cells (Extended Data Fig. 9g). Deletion of GNB2 or PREX1 in cells already lacking GPR84 only modestly decreased ADCP of APMAP-knockout cells, consistent with their function in a common pathway with GPR84 (Extended Data Fig. 9h). Stimulation of GPR84 using either the medium-chain fatty acid capric acid, which was previously reported to activate GPR84, or two synthetic agonists, ZQ-16 and 6-OAU, stimulated antibody-dependent phagocytosis of SafeKO cells (Fig. 4e, Extended Data Fig. 10a), but not APMAPKO cells (Extended Data Fig. 10b). We observed inhibition of uptake in APMAPKO target cells at high concentrations of GPR84 agonists (Extended Data Fig. 10b), which may reflect GPR84 desensitization, as previously observed. Finally, we tested whether GPR84 stimulation—like APMAP loss—exhibits synergy with monoclonal antibodies in driving cancer cell phagocytosis, and found that GPR84 agonists stimulated Ramos phagocytosis in the presence of either anti-CD20 (Extended Data Fig. 10c, d) or anti-CD47 (Extended Data Fig. 10e). By contrast, GPR84 agonists had no effect in the absence of monoclonal antibodies (Extended Data Fig. 10c–e) or on GPR84-knockout (GPR84KO) macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 10f). Together, our combined chemical and genetic analyses reveal an unexpected role for G-protein-coupled receptor signalling in enhanced ADCP of APMAP-deficient target cells.
Discussion
Monoclonal antibody therapies have been described as ‘magic bullets’ in cancer therapy because, in principle, they enable customizable elimination of cancer cells by macrophages, which are abundant in most tumours. However, low phagocytic activity of macrophages in the tumour microenvironment and expression of anti-phagocytic factors by cancer cells remain key obstacles to fulfilling the promise of monoclonal antibody therapies in the treatment of diverse cancers. Here we developed a functional genomic approach to study tumour–macrophage interactions by conducting complementary genome-wide screens for ADCP regulators in both cancer cells and macrophages. We identified a large number of genes that enhance or suppress ADCP, which help to illuminate the basic biology of macrophage–tumour interactions and may serve to identify novel potential therapeutic targets.
Our identification of APMAP as a cancer-intrinsic anti-phagocytic factor is notable because of the broad conservation of this function across different cancer types. We evaluated the effect of APMAP in 11 different cancer cell lines treated with 5 tumour-targeting antibodies, using both primary human macrophages and mouse tumour models; in each case we found that APMAP loss significantly enhanced the effects of tumour-targeting antibodies. Using complementary CRISPR screens in macrophages, we identified GPR84 as essential for enhanced uptake of APMAP-deficient cells. These findings raise the question of how GPR84 ‘recognizes’ APMAP-deficient cells. One possibility, suggested by homology between APMAP and the paraoxonase family of lipid hydrolases, is that APMAP hydrolyses and/or prevents the accumulation of endogenous lipids that function as paracrine agonists of GPR84 (Fig. 4f, Supplementary Note 5). Our identification of the Rac-GEF PREX1 as an additional macrophage requirement for enhanced uptake of APMAPKO cells suggests the mechanistic basis for the synergy we observe between APMAP loss and monoclonal antibodies in ADCP. PREX1 is synergistically activated by Gβ proteins (a class of proteins that includes GNB2) and phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate, which convey signals downstream of G-protein-coupled receptor and Fc receptor activation, respectively, and may thus serve as a ‘coincidence detector’ that triggers Rac-induced actin polymerization only upon receipt of two distinct activating signals.
Although some immunosuppressive molecules inhibit multiple immune cell types, with, for example, CD47 found to confer resistance to T cell killing, most of the genes we identify—including APMAP—were not detected by previous screens for regulators of T cell killing. For APMAP, this might be because GPR84 expression is restricted to macrophages and because the sensitizing effect of APMAP loss appears to be specific to monoclonal-antibody-induced cancer cell killing. A distinct advantage of our inter-cellular screening platform is that it facilitates identification of target-specific immune receptors. Our finding that GPR84 is a substrate-selective macrophage receptor for APMAP-deficient cancer cells provides a proof of principle for this approach, which may now be applied to other orphan anti-phagocytic factors. Overall, our work provides both a rich resource of candidate cancer-intrinsic regulators of phagocytosis and establishes a platform for rapidly identifying their cognate receptors on macrophages.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03879-4.
Methods
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The experiments were not randomized and investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment. Statistical analyses were performed as indicated in the legends using GraphPad PRISM (version 9).
Cell culture
Ramos, Karpas-299, NCI-H82 and K562 cells were maintained in suspension culture in T-150 flasks for library propagation and tissue culture plates for single-gene knockout lines, all in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 100 U ml−1 penicillin, 100 μg ml−1 streptomycin and 10% fetal calf serum (FCS). U937 cells were maintained in suspension culture in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 100 U ml−1 penicillin, 100 μg ml−1 streptomycin and 10% heat-inactivated FCS. J774 cells were cultured in 15-cm plates for screens and library preparation in DMEM supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 100 U ml−1 penicillin, 100 μg ml−1 streptomycin and 10% heat-inactivated FCS and were passaged when nearing confluency by scraping. HCT-116, RKO, SKBR3 and NCI-H23 cells were cultured in RPMI supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 100 U ml−1 penicillin, 100 μg ml−1 streptomycin and 10% FCS and passaged with Accutase. HeLa cells and OVCAR8 cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 100 U ml−1 penicillin, 100 μg ml−1 streptomycin and 10% FCS and passaged with Accutase. B16-F10 cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 100 U ml−1 penicillin, 100 μg ml−1 streptomycin and 10% FCS and passaged with trypsin. All cells were cultured in a humidified 37 °C incubator set at 5% CO2 and passaged 2–3 times weekly. To generate frozen aliquots, cells were pelleted by centrifugation (300g, 5 min, room temperature), suspended in 90% FCS and 10% dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), and frozen in cell-freezing containers at −80 °C overnight before transfer to liquid nitrogen for long-term storage. Cell lines from ATCC were authenticated by the vendor using short tandem repeat (STR) profiling to distinguish between individual human cell lines and rule out intra-species contamination. No further authentication was performed. Cell lines were tested and confirmed negative for mycoplasma contamination by PCR.
Genome-wide and sublibrary CRISPR screens in Ramos cells
For the CRISPR knockout screen in Ramos cells, a genome-wide, 10 sgRNA per gene CRISPR deletion library was synthesized, cloned and infected into Cas9-expressing Ramos cells as previously described. In brief, about 300 million Ramos cells stably expressing SFFV-Cas9-BFP were infected with the CRISPR knockout library at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of about 0.2. Cells expressing sgRNAs were selected using puromycin (1 μg ml−1) for 3 d such that >90% of cells were mCherry-positive as measured by flow cytometry. Selected cells were then allowed to recover and expand in puromycin-free medium for up to 7 d. For the CRISPRa screen, a clonal dCas9–VPR-expressing line was first constructed by transducing wild-type Ramos cells with a lentiviral construct expressing dCas9–VPR-t2a-GFP. Cells expressing low levels of GFP were sorted into single-cell clones and active clones were identified on the basis of induction of CD2 expression following transduction with an sgRNA targeting the CD2 transcription start site. One of the active clones was selected for subsequent experiments based on the degree of CD2 induction as well as its similar growth rate and phagocytosis susceptibility compared to the parental cell population. As with the CRISPR knockout screen, a genome-wide, 10-sgRNA-per-gene library was synthesized, cloned and infected into CRISPRa-expressing Ramos cells and selected with puromycin as above.
For the screens, cells were split into two conditions, each in duplicate: an untreated control group and an ADCP-treated group. In the ADCP group, for each round of treatment, Ramos cells were incubated with J774 macrophages, which had been seeded into 15-cm plates 48 h earlier (at 5 million cells per plate) and treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (100 ng ml−1) starting 24 h earlier, in the presence of anti-CD20 antibodies (hcd20-mab1, Invivogen) (50 ng ml−1) (CRISPR knockout screen) or both anti-CD20 antibodies (50 ng ml−1) and anti-CD47 antibodies (clone B6.H12, BioXCell) (100 ng ml−1) (CRISPRa screen). 25 million Ramos cells were added to each plate and incubated with J774 macrophages for 24 h, and were then removed from the macrophage-containing plates via two rounds of washing with complete RPMI medium. Ramos cells were then allowed to recover in T-150 flasks for 24–72 h before the next round of treatment. At the end of the screen, 300 million cells were recovered from each condition and pelleted by centrifugation. Genomic DNA of each condition was extracted using a DNA Blood Maxi kit (Qiagen, catalogue no. 51194). The sgRNA sequences were amplified and sequenced using an Illumina NextSeq with about 40 million reads per condition; about 200× coverage per library element). Analysis and comparison of guide composition of ADCP treated versus untreated conditions were performed using casTLE as previously described. The complete genome-wide Ramos screen results are presented in Supplementary Tables 2, 4. Sublibrary screens in Extended Data Fig. 3a–c were conducted similarly, but in the indicated genetic backgrounds and with indicated antibodies, and using a 3,124-gene sublibrary enriched for transmembrane proteins. Batch re-test screens were conducted similarly, but at 2,000× coverage of the library, and using a 730-gene sublibrary that contained the top 250 genes from the Ramos CRISPR knockout screen and 480 genes with positive effect size from the Ramos CRISPRa screen. In the batch re-test screen, because the library was highly enriched for hits, genes were noted as hits when their combination effect score at 95% credible interval did not include zero, as described previously. Sublibraries were synthesized as previously described. The complete sublibrary Ramos CRISPR screen results are presented in Supplementary Tables 3, 5.
Genome-wide CRISPR screens in Karpas-299 cells
Genome-wide CRISPR knockout screens in Karpas-299 cells were performed similarly to the genome-wide screens in Ramos cells. In Extended Data Fig. 2i, anti-CD30 (clone Hu8, R and D Systems) was included in place of anti-CD20, and in Fig. 2c, anti-CD47 (clone B6.H12) was included in place of anti-CD20.
Genome-wide and sublibrary macrophage screens
For the CRISPR knockout screen in J774 cells, a genome-wide, 10-sgRNA-per-gene CRISPR mouse deletion library was synthesized and cloned as previously described and infected into Cas9-expressing J774 cells. Following puromycin selection, the genome-wide library was propagated for 7–10 d before use in screens. For the genome-wide bead screen in Extended Data Fig. 7, J774 macrophages were plated in 15-cm tissue culture dishes at a starting density of 10 million cells per plate. After 24 h, macrophages were incubated with Protein G Dynabeads (about 2 beads per cell, Thermo Fisher) that were opsonized by successive incubations with mouse anti-Flag (Sigma) and goat anti-mouse antibodies (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cells were lifted by scraping, washed in PBS, and exposed to a DynaMag magnet (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After a series of four washes, magnet-bound cells were collected and collected for genomic DNA extraction. The unbound fraction and the first wash were collected and re-exposed to the magnet for 10 min before collection for genomic DNA extraction. PCRs, sequencing and hit identification (by comparing the bound and unbound cell fractions) with CasTLE were performed as previously described. For the genome-wide ADCP screen in Fig. 4, macrophages were plated in 15-cm tissue culture dishes at a starting density of 5 million cells per plate. After 24 h, medium was replaced with DMEM containing 100 ng ml−1 LPS. After a further 24 h, macrophages were incubated with a mixture of calcein-labelled SafeKO Ramos cells and CellTrace far-red-labelled APMAPKO macrophages for 24 h. Unphagocytosed Ramos cells were removed by extensive washing with PBS. Macrophages were lifted by scraping, washed twice in PBS, concentrated by centrifugation, and separated into four populations on an Aria (BD) flow cytometer. In total, about 80 million cells were collected for each replicate across the 4 gated populations and used for genomic DNA extractions, PCRs, next-generation sequencing and subsequent hit identification using CasTLE, as above. The complete genome-wide screen results are presented in Supplementary Tables 6, 7. Sublibrary screens in Extended Data Fig. 9 were conducted similarly, but using a 2,208-gene sublibrary enriched for phagocytosis regulators, derived from the J774 IgG bead genome-wide screen hits and the literature. The complete sublibrary J774 CRISPRko FACS screen results are presented in Supplementary Table 8.
Gene ontology enrichment analysis
Gene ontology enrichment analyses were performed using gProfiler (version e.96_eg.43) as ordered queries.
Generation of cell lines
For generating individual sgRNA-expressing cell lines, Ramos, J774, U937, Karpas-299, HeLa, HCT-116, NCI-H23, RKO, K562, SKBR3 and NCI-H82 cells that express Cas9 or dCas9–VPR were infected with lentiviral constructs expressing a given sgRNA along with puromycin or blasticidin resistance cassette. At 3 d after infection, cells were selected with 1–2 μg ml−1 puromycin or 10 μg ml−1 blasticidin for an additional 3 d, and allowed to recover for 2–3 d before use in assays. B16-F10 knockout cells were constructed by transfecting cells with two plasmids expressing Cas9–BFP and sgRNA/GFP and isolating GFP/BFP-positive cells by FACS. Sequences of sgRNAs used for validation are listed in Supplementary Table 9.
Plasmids
To generate APMAP expression constructs to reconstitute in APMAP knockout cell lines, the human APMAP open reading frame, with a 3×Flag tag appended to the C terminus, and with synonymous mutations to block targeting with APMAP-targeting sgRNAs, was synthesized (Twist Biosciences) and cloned into a pCR-Blunt backbone vector. Point mutations (E103A in Fig 2g, N160A and N196A in Extended Data Fig. 5e, f) were installed using site-directed mutagenesis, and the APMAP–Flag region was then subcloned into pMCB394, a lentiviral expression vector. For the Δcyto truncation in Extended Data Fig. 5c, the region encoding APMAP residues 62–416 was amplified with a new start codon and cloned into pMCB394. The chimeric constructs in Extended Data Fig. 5d were created by amplifying the regions encoding the cytoplasmic and transmembrane domains of two single-pass transmembrane proteins with similar topology to APMAP–POMK (residues 1–43) and TFRC (residues 1–88, with the first 6 residues encoded in the primer to change them from the endogenous sequence to MSRRRS, mutations that were shown to retain TFRC primarily in the endoplasmic reticulum) and fusing them via overlap extension PCR to the region encoding APMAP residues 62–416. The TFRCRR allele was used in place of TFRCWT, as the TFRCWT–APMAP–Flag chimera was not detectable by western blotting.
Immunoblotting
Cleared cell extracts prepared in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 1× cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) were heated in SDS loading buffer and separated by SDS–PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose, blotted and imaged using an Odyssey CLx (LI-COR Biosciences) or Supersignal West Femto Maximum Sensitivity Substrate with a Chemidoc System (Bio-Rad). In Extended Data Fig. 6a, cell pellets were resupended directly in SDS loading buffer, sonicated, and separated by SDS–PAGE. In Extended Data Fig. 5e, extracts were first treated with PNGase F (NEB) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The following antibodies were used: mouse monoclonal anti-APMAP (OTI4F6, Origene, 1:2,000 dilution), mouse monoclonal anti-Flag (clone M2, F1804, Sigma, 1:2,000 dilution), mouse monoclonal anti-GAPDH (clone 6C5, AM4300, Fisher, 1:5,000 dilution), and rabbit polyclonal anti-β-actin (ab8227, Abcam, 1:2,000 dilution).
Flow cytometry
Ramos cells were analysed by flow cytometry using the following antibodies: anti-CD20-APC (clone 2H7, Biolegend), anti-CD2-APC (clone REA972, Mitenyi Biotech), anti-CD47 (clone B6.H12, BioXCell), and anti-Calreticulin-DyLight-488 (FMC 75, Enzo Life Sciences), and with Annexin-V FITC (A13199, Thermo Fisher), or with biotinylated Maackia amurensis lectin II (MAL-II) (B-1265, VectorLabs) followed by streptavidin-APC (Thermo Fisher). Sialidase (neuraminidase from Vibrio cholerae, Sigma 11080725001) treatment was performed by incubating cells with 30 nM enzyme in dPBS at a cell concentration of 1 × 106 ml−1 for 1 h at 37 °C. In Extended Data Fig. 6j, single-cell suspensions were prepared from diced tumours and fixed in paraformaldehyde as described previously. Cells were stained with Zombie-NIR viability dye (BioLegend), anti-CD45 (clone 30-F11, BioLegend), anti-F4/80 (clone BM8, BioLegend) and anti-CD11b (clone M1/70, BioLegend) and analysed using an Acea Novocyte Quanteon flow cytometer and FlowJo software (version 10.6.1). Live CD45+ cells were counted using gates that separated the CD45− and CD45+ populations, and macrophages were counted using a single gate applied equally to all samples.
Isolation of human peripheral blood mononuclear cell derived macrophages
Primary human donor-derived macrophages were isolated and cultured following a previously described protocol with minor modifications. Leukocyte reduction chambers were obtained from de-identified healthy donors from the Stanford Blood Center. The protocol was approved by the Stanford University Administrative Panel on Human Subjects in Medical Research and all donors provided informed consent. Cells were separated using Ficoll–Paque gradient centrifugation as previously described. Monocytes were then isolated via their adhesion to tissue culture plastic in serum-free RPMI-1640, and subsequently differentiated into macrophages in RPMI-1640 containing 20% heat-inactivated FCS containing 20 ng ml−1 human M-CSF (Peprotech) for 5 d, then lifted with Accutase and manual scraping, and allowed to adhere overnight in 24 well plates. Macrophages were then treated for 48 h with 100 ng ml−1 LPS before use in phagocytosis assays.
Time-lapse microscopy assay for phagocytosis
For use in phagocytosis assays, U937 cells were cultured and differentiated with phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) as described previously, and then plated for 3 d after initiating differentiation at a density of 100,000 cells per well in 24-well tissue culture plates, then treated with 100 ng ml−1 LPS (Sigma) for 48 h before use in assays. J774 cells were lifted by scraping, counted, and plated in 24-well tissue culture plates at a density of 100,000 cells per well in 0.5 ml medium 48 h before the start of the experiment. At 24 h after plating, medium was aspirated and replaced with fresh medium containing 100 ng ml−1 LPS (Sigma) (that is, in all instances other than Extended Data Figs. 1c, 4d (left)). On the day of the experiment, target cells that had been transduced with sgRNAs and selected with puromycin or blasticidin as described above were counted, washed three times in dPBS before incubation in dPBS containing 100 nM pHrodo-Red succinimidyl ester (Thermo Fisher) at a cell concentration of 1 million ml−1 for 30 min at 37 °C, pelleted, and resuspended in DMEM supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 100 U ml−1 penicillin, 100 μg ml−1 streptomycin and 10% heat-inactivated FCS, and containing anti-CD20, anti-CD30, anti-EGFR (clone Hu1, R and D Systems), anti-CD47 antibodies, anti-TRP1 (clone TA99, BioXCell), and/or isotype control antibodies, as indicated, at a cell concentration of 1 × 106 ml−1. Antibodies were used at the following concentrations in ADCP assays unless otherwise indicated: anti-CD20 (500 ng ml−1), anti-CD30 (500 ng ml−1), anti-EGFR (500 ng ml−1), anti-CD47 (10 μg ml−1), anti-TRP1 (10 μg ml−1). Cell suspensions (200,000–500,000 cells per well of a 24-well plate for suspension cell lines, or 50,000 cells per well for adherent cell lines) were then added to each well and allowed to settle. Where indicated, GPR84 agonists (capric acid (C1875, Sigma), 6-OAU (17687, Cayman), ZQ-16 (SML1646, Sigma)) or other compounds (acetic acid (BP2400500, Fisher), palmitic acid (10006627, Cayman), docosanoic acid (9000338, Cayman)) were included at indicated concentrations. In Extended Data Fig. 3e, where indicated, macrophages were pre-incubated with mouse Fc receptor-blocking antibodies (50 μg ml−1,101319, BioLegend) for 45 min at 4 °C before addition of target cells. Plates were transferred to an incubator and imaged every 30 or 60 min using an Incucyte (Essen). Total red intensity for each well, averaged over 9–16 images per well, was calculated after applying a threshold for red intensity that excluded most or all cells at the first time point using top-hat background subtraction. Reported values represent the mean total red fluorescence intensity at each timepoint (Fig. 1f, 5 h; Fig. 2b, 6.5 h; Fig. 2e, 3 h; Fig. 2g, 14 h; Fig. 3a: Ramos, 4.5 h; Karpas-299, 4 h; HCT-116, 3.5 h; RKO, 3 h; SKBR3, 6 h; OVCAR8, 20 h; K562, 3 h; NCI-H23, 8 h; NCI-H82, 4 h; HeLa; 3h; Fig. 4d, 8 h; Fig. 4e, 9 h; Extended Data Fig. 3d, 3.5 h; Extended Data Fig. 3e, 4 h; Extended Data Fig. 3f, 3 h; Extended Data Fig. 4b, 12 h; Extended Data Fig. 4c, 6 h; Extended Data Fig. 4d, 2 h; Extended Data Fig. 5c, 4 h; Extended Data Fig. 5d, 7.5 h; Extended Data Fig. 5f, 4 h; Extended Data Fig. 6d: 8 h; Extended Data Fig. 6e: HCT-116, 6 h, OVCAR8, 8 h, NCI-H23, 7 h, HeLa 4 h; Extended Data Fig. 6k, 6 h; Extended Data Fig. 9b, 24 h; Extended Data Fig. 10a, b, 2.5 h; Extended Data Fig. 10c, 5 h; Extended Data Fig. 10d, e, 4 h; Extended Data Fig. 10f, 2 h. In some panels with GFP+ target cells, red intensity was normalized to total GFP signal at t = 0 h to account for minor variation in cell abundance, and the total red fluorescence at the initial timepoint was subtracted (to remove signal from occasional autofluorescent debris), of duplicate, triplicate or quadruplicate cell culture wells, as indicated in the legend.
Flow cytometry assays for phagocytosis
In Extended Data Fig. 4l, Ramos target cells were stained with calcein, AM (500 ng ml−1, Thermo Fisher) or CellTrace Far Red dyes (1:2,000 dilution of stock prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions, C34564, Thermo Fisher) for 10 min in PBS at 1 × 106 cells per ml, washed twice with DMEM containing 10% FCS, and incubated for 24 h with LPS-treated J774 macrophages prior to analysis by flow cytometry (BD Accuri C6). In Extended Data Fig. 9h, Ramos CD47KO target cells were stained with calcein, AM (500 ng ml−1, Thermo Fisher) and APMAPKO cells were stained with CellTrace Far Red dyes (1:2,000 dilution of stock prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions) for 10 min in PBS at 1 × 106 cells per ml, washed twice with DMEM containing 10% FCS, mixed together with anti-CD20 (500 ng μl−1), and incubated for 24 h with LPS-treated J774 macrophages before analysis by flow cytometry (BD Accuri C6).
Target cell–macrophage adhesion assay
To measure antibody-dependent binding between J774 macrophages and Ramos target cells, macrophages were plated in 24 well tissue culture plates at a density of 100,000 cells per well in 0.5 ml medium 48 h before the start of the experiment and stimulated with LPS 24 h before the experiment as above. On the day of the experiment, medium was aspirated and replaced with DMEM containing 1 μg ml−1 cytochalasin D (Sigma C8273), and incubated for 10 min at room temperature. Ramos cells (200–500,000) were then added to wells and incubated for 2 h at 37 °C. Plates were imaged before and after three washes with PBS to determine the abundance of GFP+ Ramos cells (as measured by integrated green intensity) using an Incucyte (Essen) using a 10× objective.
Cell survival analyses
To measure cell survival during co-culture with macrophages, two methods were used. In Extended Data Fig. 1j, mCherry+ Ramos cells expressing indicated sgRNAs were mixed with an equal number of GFP+ Ramos control cells, and incubated with LPS-treated J774 macrophages in the presence of anti-CD20. The percentage of mCherry+ Ramos cells out of all live Ramos cells was quantified for each cell line, and normalized to the percentage of mCherry+ Ramos control cells, which expressed a non-targeting sgRNA. In Extended Data Fig. 6c, f, survival was measured by quantifying the total GFP signal per well before and after incubation of GFP+ target cells with LPS-treated J774 macrophages (GFP fluorescence is quenched following uptake of target cells and delivery to the lysosome).
Transcriptome analysis
J774 cells were seeded in triplicate at a density 1 × 106 cells per 10-cm plate. Twenty-four hours later, cells were either collected (untreated condition) or medium was replaced with medium containing 100 ng ml−1 LPS for 24 h. At collection, cells were lysed in RLT buffer and RNA was isolated using the RNeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen). cDNA libraries were prepared using a TruSeq Stranded mRNA Kit (Illumina) and sequenced using an Illumina NextSeq with about 25 million reads per condition. Transcripts were mapped using STAR (v2.7.0) and gene-level counts were generated using HTSeq (v.0.13.5), followed by differential gene expression analysis using DESeq2 (1.28.1).
Viability measurements
In Extended Data Fig. 4i, Ramos cells were plated in 96-well plates in triplicate at a starting density of 50,000 cells per well. Drugs (Sigma) were then added to wells at indicated final concentrations. Cell viability was determined by measuring the phase confluence at 72 h using an Incucyte (Essen). In Extended Data Fig. 6l, B16-F10 cells were seeded in 24-well plates and phase confluence was measured every 8 h for 6 d.
Confocal microscopy
HeLa cells were transduced with a lentiviral construct co-expressing APMAP–Flag and BlastR, selected with blasticidin and cultured in glass-bottom 24-well plates. Cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde and probed with anti-Flag (clone M2, Sigma F1804, 1:100 dilution) and anti-calnexin (Abcam Technologies ab22595, 1:1,000 dilution) primary antibodies, and Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse (A-11029, Thermo Fisher) and APC goat-anti-rabbit (A-10931, Thermo Fisher) secondary antibodies, and imaged using an inverted Nikon Eclipse Ti-E spinning disk confocal microscope using NIS-Elements software (v4.4, Nikon) and an Andor Ixon3 EMCCD camera using an oil-immersion 100× objective (NA 1.45). Images were assembled and adjusted for brightness and contrast in Photoshop CS6 (Adobe).
Analysis of differential expression in TCGA
Differential gene expression in 23 TCGA tumour studies was calculated for each gene by comparing gene expression in each tumour study to normal tissue and calculating the fold change with DESeq2.
Analysis of single-cell RNA sequencing studies
Analysis of GPR84 expression in human tumour samples was performed using four single-cell RNA-sequencing datasets. scRNAseq pre-processing, cell type assignment, t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding (t-SNE) (Extended Data Fig. 8a–d), and gene expression quantification were performed as described previously.
Homology model of APMAP
Using Swiss-Model (template library SMTL version 2020–07-22, PDB release 2020–07-17) with Uniprot accession code for APMAP (Q9DHC9) as input, 50 template structures were retrieved up to a GMQE* score of 0.25. A parallel search was done using FUGUE (version 2.0). Swiss-Model was used with strictosidine synthase from Rauvolfia serpentina (STR1; sequence similarity = 34%; PDB accession ID: 6nv5, unpublished) and serum paraoxonase-1 (PON1; sequence similarity = 29 %; PDB accession ID: 3sre) first as the highest scoring template structures. Modelling was done on the soluble region, residues 61–407 of APMAP, using the PON1 structure. The automatically generated model was completed by assigning it the 30 N-terminal residues from Drp35 from Staphylococcus aureus (PDB accession ID: 2dg1). The modelling resulted in a 6-blade beta-propeller structure, which was manually inspected in COOT (version 0.7 (revision 4459)), and the coordinates refined against reference parameters with REFMAC5 (version 5.8.0135) until deviation from ideal bond length, bond angle, planar restraints, chiral volume, reached convergence and Ramachandran outliers were minimized (1.7% (5 out of 347) of the total residues were outliers).
Mouse tumour xenografts
For mouse tumour experiments, tumour xenografts were established by injection of SafeKO and APMAPKO Ramos or NCI-H82 cells into the flank of male and female NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG) mice, purchased at 8–12 weeks of age (Jackson Laboratories). In brief, 4 × 106 Ramos cells or 1 × 106 NCI-H82 cells were mixed with Matrigel (1:1, BD Biosciences) and injected into mouse flanks. Tumours were allowed to form for 12–21 d, and then mice were injected intraperitoneally with PBS or antibody daily (anti-CD47: 400 μg; B6H12, BioXCell; anti-CD20 (Rituxan): 200 μg, Stanford Pharmacy), and tumour size was measured using calipers. In the NCI-H82 xenograft experiment, tumours in all groups were subjected to irradiation (3 Gy/1 fr) on day 12. Animal irradiation was performed using a PXi X-rad SmART cabinet irradiator (Precision X-ray). Tumour size was measured once every 2 days until the end of the experiment. The number of mice represented in the final analysis was 5–7 for all groups. No statistical tests were used to calculate sample size. Following injection of SafeKO or APMAPKO tumour cells into 14–17 mice, the mice that failed to develop tumours were excluded, and the remaining mice were randomly assigned into two treatment groups for PBS or antibody injection. Fold change in tumour volume was statistically analysed for indicated comparisons using two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s correction. Blinding was not possible because the experiments were performed by a single researcher. All mouse experiments were conducted in accordance with the guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUC) of Stanford University. Mice were euthanized once the largest xenograft tumours reached 1,500 mm3. No mouse exhibited severe loss of body weight (>15%) or evidence of infections or wounds. Full data are included as Source Data.
Syngeneic mouse model
For syngeneic mouse tumour experiments, tumours were established by injection of either SafeKO or APMAPKO B16-F10 cells into the flank of 8- to 12-week-old female C57BL/6J mice (Jackson Laboratories). In brief, 5 × 105 cells were injected in a 100 μl suspension, consisting of 25% Matrigel Basement Membrane Matrix (Corning) and 75% RPMI (Life Technologies). Tumours were established for 5 d, and on day 5, mice were randomized into treatment and isotype control groups. Starting on Day 5 post-engraftment, mice were injected intraperitoneally with either anti-TRP1 (TA99) or isotype control (mouse IgG2a) antibodies (BioXCell, 250 μg) every other day, following a dosing regimen used previously. Engraftment outliers were removed as determined by Graphpad Prism Outlier Calculator. Tumour size was measured in two dimensions using precision calipers twice weekly for the duration of the experiment. Tumour volumes were calculated by approximating tumours as ellipsoids with two radii, x and y, in which x is the largest measurable dimension of the tumour and y is the dimension immediately perpendicular to x, using the formula: volume = 4/3π × (x/2)2 × (y/2). The number of mice represented in the final analysis was 6–7 for all groups. No statistical tests were used to calculate sample size. Starting sample size was n = 7–8 for each treatment group to account for differences in tumour engraftment and growth, and to ensure recovery of a sufficient quantity of mice with tumours of approved size at each time point of the study. Data are presented up to day 20 (when sufficient mice were still alive to analyse the full randomized cohort), and full data (until day 25) are included as Source Data. Change in tumour volume was evaluated using two-way ANOVA in GraphPad Prism. Blinding was not possible because the experiments were primarily performed by a single researcher. All mouse experiments were conducted in accordance with the guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUC) of Stanford University. Mice were euthanized once several of the largest xenograft tumours had reached 2,000 mm3. No mouse exhibited severe loss of body weight (>15%) or evidence of infections or wounds. Full data are included as Source Data.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
Data availability
CRISPR screen and RNA-seq raw sequencing data are available under BioProject accession number PRJNA748551. All other primary data for all figures and supplementary figures are available from the corresponding author upon request. Gene dependency data from the Cancer Dependency Map are publicly available at www.depmap.org. Cancer expression data from The Cancer Genome Atlas are available at https://gdc.cancer.gov. CCLE data are available at https://sites.broadinstitute.org/ccle/. Source data are provided with this paper.
Extended Data
CRISPR knockout screening platform for regulators of ADCP in cancer cells and batch retest validation screen results.
a, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos cells by J774 macrophages in the presence or absence of anti-CD20 and/or anti-CD47 antibodies. Normalized phagocytosis index was calculated as average total pHrodo Red signal per well, normalized to signal in untreated control condition at final timepoint. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 4). Two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. b, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos cells by J774 or U937 macrophages in the presence of anti-CD20. Normalized phagocytosis index was calculated as average total pHrodo Red signal per well, normalized to signal in U937 cells at final timepoint. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3). Two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. c, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos cells by J774 macrophages with or without 24 h pre-treatment with 100 ng ml-1 LPS. Normalized phagocytosis index was calculated as average total pHrodo Red signal per well, normalized to signal in untreated control condition at final timepoint. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 4). Two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. d, Differential expression analysis of J774 macrophages before and after treatment (24 h) with 100 ng ml-1 LPS, showing induction of classic LPS-activated M1 macrophage markers NOS2 and IL1B. e, Replicates for CRISPRko screen in Ramos cells for susceptibility to ADCP driven by anti-CD20 antibodies. f, Gene ontology enrichment analysis for negative Ramos CRISPRko ADCP hits (cutoff of CasTLE score > 50). n indicates number of genes among query gene list annotated with indicated term. g, Batch re-test screen for ADCP sensitivity in Ramos Cas9 cells. Library comprised top 250 hits (both positive and negative effect sizes) from genome-wide CRISPRko screen and top 480 anti-phagocytic hits from CRISPRa screen. Hits were defined based on 95% confidence interval of CasTLE effect size (see Supplementary Table 3). h, Replicates of Batch re-test screen in Ramos Cas9 cells. i, Comparison of Ramos batch re-test and genome-wide ADCP CRISPRko screens for genes that were hits in the CRISPRko screen. j, Survival assay for Ramos Cas9 cells subjected to treatment with macrophages and anti-CD20, expressing indicated sgRNAs (2 distinct sgRNAs per gene). GFP+ Ramos Cas9 cells expressing negative control sgRNA were mixed with an equal number of mCherry+ cells expressing indicated sgRNAs and cultured in the presence of J774 macrophages and anti-CD20 antibodies. Plotted is the mean percentage of surviving Ramos cells that were mCherry+ after 2 d, normalized to control (Ctrl) Ramos cells that expressed an empty vector) (n = 3 cell culture wells, data represent mean +/− s.d.). One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction.
CRISPR activation screening platform development and analysis of anti-phagocytic hits.
a, Validation of Ramos CRISPRa clones. Single-cell derived CRISPRa clones were constructed as described in the Methods and transduced with sgRNAs targeting CD2 (using a lentiviral vector co-expressing GFP). Indicated clones and parent Ramos cells were stained with anti-CD2-APC antibodies. Mean APC signal in the GFP+ population is plotted (n = 2 technical replicates, mean is shown). Clone #6 was used for screening. b, Replicates for CRISPRa screen in Ramos cells for susceptibility to ADCP driven by anti-CD20 and anti-CD47 antibodies. c, Gene ontology enrichment analysis for positive Ramos CRISPRa ADCP hits (cutoff of CasTLE score > 50) (top) and top 50 anti-phagocytic factors (bottom). n indicates number of genes among query gene list annotated with that term. d, Schematic of time-lapse imaging assay for ADCP. pHrodo-Red fluorescence intensity increases in low-pH conditions, such as in the lysosome following internalization of the target cell. e, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos cells, stably expressing indicated constructs, by J774 macrophages in the presence of anti-CD20 and anti-CD47 antibodies. Normalized phagocytosis index was calculated as average total pHrodo Red signal per well, normalized to signal in GFP-FLAG cells at final timepoint. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 4 cell culture wells). Two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. f, Expression (TPM) of SMAGP in 1304 cell lines in CCLE. g, h, Flow cytometry assays for anti-CD20 and anti-CD45 binding to Ramos CRISPRa cells expressing indicated sgRNAs. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3 independently stained samples). One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. i, Volcano plot of screen in Karpas-299 cells conducted in presence of anti-CD30 antibodies. Dotted line indicates 5% FDR. j, Heatmap of differential expression for 12 selected anti-phagocytic genes in 23 tumour types compared to normal tissue. Tumour type abbreviations are listed here: https://gdc.cancer.gov/resources-tcga-users/tcga-code-tables/tcga-study-abbreviations. k, Minimum expression (TPM) across all cell lines in CCLE is plotted against maximum probability of essentiality in all cell lines profiled in DepMap for 50 top anti-phagocytic hits shown in Fig. 1e.
Screens for cancer cell regulators of ADCP in the presence or absence of CD47 and evaluation of importance of antibodies and Fc receptor for APMAP effect.
a, Schematic and volcano plot of CRISPR screen in Ramos Cas9 cells for sensitivity to macrophage phagocytosis in the presence of anti-CD20 in cells expressing an sgRNA targeting a Safe locus. Dotted line indicates 5% FDR. A transmembrane gene-enriched sublibrary containing 3,124 genes was used. b, Schematic and volcano plot of CRISPR screen in Ramos Cas9 cells for sensitivity to macrophage phagocytosis in the presence of anti-CD20 in cells expressing an sgRNA targeting the CD47 locus. Dotted line indicates 5% FDR. A transmembrane gene-enriched sublibrary containing 3,124 genes was used. c, Schematic and volcano plot of CRISPRko screen in Ramos Cas9 cells for sensitivity to macrophage phagocytosis in the presence of anti-CD20 and anti-CD47 in cells expressing an sgRNA targeting a Safe locus. Dotted line indicates 5% FDR. A transmembrane gene-enriched sublibrary containing 3,124 genes was used. d, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos cells with indicated genotypes by human primary peripheral blood-derived macrophages, from two independent healthy de-identified human donors, in the presence or absence of anti-CD47 antibodies. Phagocytosis index normalized to control (SafeKO) cells without anti-CD47. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 4 cell culture wells). One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. e, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos cells with indicated genotypes by J774 macrophages in the presence of anti-CD20 or anti-CD47 antibodies. Where indicated, J774 macrophages were pre-incubated with Fc-blocking antibodies for 45 min on ice. Phagocytosis index normalized to control (SafeKO) cells without antibody analysed in parallel (condition not shown). Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3 cell culture wells). Two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. f, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos cells with indicated genotypes by J774 macrophages in the absence of antibodies. Phagocytosis index normalized to control (SafeKO/SafeKO) cells. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3 cell culture wells). One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction.
APMAP loss sensitizes cells to ADCP in a highly specific manner and without affecting surface levels of other pro- and anti-phagocytic factors.
a, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Karpas-299 Cas9 cells expressing indicated sgRNAs by J774 macrophages in the presence or absence of anti-CD30 antibodies. Normalized phagocytosis index was calculated as average total pHrodo Red signal per well, normalized to signal in untreated control condition at final timepoint. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 4 cell culture wells). Two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. b, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos cells with indicated genotypes by human U937 macrophages in the presence or absence of anti-CD20 (rituximab) antibodies at indicated concentrations. Phagocytosis index normalized to control (SafeKO) Ramos cells without anti-CD20. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 4 cell culture wells). Two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. c, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos cells with indicated genotypes by human primary peripheral blood-derived macrophages, from two independent healthy de-identified human donors, in the presence or absence of 10 ng ml−1 anti-CD20 antibodies. Phagocytosis index normalized to control (SafeKO) Ramos cells without anti-CD20. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3 cell culture wells). One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. d, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos Cas9 cells expressing indicated sgRNAs by J774 macrophages with or without 24 h pre-treatment with 100 ng ml-1 LPS. Normalized phagocytosis index was calculated as average total pHrodo Red signal per well, normalized to signal in untreated control condition at final timepoint. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 4 cell culture wells). e, Ramos Cas9 cells expressing indicated sgRNAs were incubated with Annexin V-FITC or anti-Calreticulin-DyLight-488 and analysed by flow cytometry. CRT, calreticulin. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3 independently stained samples). P-values were from two-tailed t-tests. f, Flow-cytometry based measurement of cell surface levels of CD20 in Ramos Cas9 cells expressing indicated sgRNAs. Data represent mean (n = 2 independently stained samples, except cells expressing CD20 sgRNA (n = 1)). g, Flow-cytometry based measurement of cell surface levels of CD47 in Ramos Cas9 cells expressing indicated sgRNAs. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3 independently stained samples). h, Flow-cytometry based measurement of cell surface levels of sialic acid in Ramos Cas9 cells expressing indicated sgRNAs. Where indicated, cells were treated with sialidase as a positive control. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3 independently stained samples). i, Viability assays (measured as cell confluence after 72 h on Incucyte, normalized to untreated SafeKO control cells) of indicated Ramos cells in the presence of indicated concentrations of 9 drugs. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3 cell culture wells). j, Flow-cytometry based measurement of forward scatter (FSC) and side scatter (SSC) in Ramos Cas9 cells expressing indicated sgRNAs. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3 independently analysed samples). k, Ramos-J774 adhesion assay in the presence of indicated antibody concentrations, using indicated GFP+ Ramos Cas9 knockout cells. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 2 cell culture wells). l, Flow-cytometry based measurement of ADCP of Ramos Cas9 cells expressing indicated sgRNAs and stained with either calcein or CellTrace-Far-Red dye before incubation with J774 macrophages and anti-CD20 for 24h. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3 cell culture wells). Two-tailed t-tests were used to compare SafeKO and APMAPKO cells within each labeling condition.
APMAP localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum and its cytosolic domain, transmembrane domain, and N-glycosylation are not required for its function in ADCP.
a, Localization of APMAP-FLAG and APMAPE103A-FLAG to the endoplasmic reticulum in HeLa cells. Scale bar, 20 μm. Calnexin is used as a marker of the endoplasmic reticulum. FLAG staining was representative of two independent experiments. b, Immunoblotting of cell extracts derived from Ramos cells of indicated genotypes expressing indicated APMAP-FLAG constructs. GAPDH served as loading control. Experiment was performed twice. c, d, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos-Cas9 cells with indicated genotypes by J774 macrophages in the presence of anti-CD20 antibodies. APMAP-F, APMAP-FLAG. TFRCRR, mutant allele of TFRC that localizes primarily to the endoplasmic reticulum. Phagocytosis index normalized to control (SafeKO) cells. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 4 cell culture wells). One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. e, Immunoblotting of cell extracts that were treated, where indicated, with PNGase F to remove N-glycosylation. Actin served as loading control. Experiment was performed once. f, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos Cas9 cells expressing indicated sgRNAs and indicated addback constructs by J774 macrophages in the presence of anti-CD20 antibodies. Normalized phagocytosis index was calculated as average total pHrodo Red signal at 5 h for each well, normalized to signal in SafeKO cells at 5 h timepoint. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3 cell culture wells). One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. For gel source data, see Supplementary Figure 1.
Evaluation of APMAP role in ADCP across diverse cancer cell lines and in syngeneic mice.
a, Levels of APMAP in ten cell lines measured by Western blot. All cell lines stably express Cas9 and were transduced with indicated sgRNAs. Actin served as loading control. Western blot to confirm knockout across all ten cell lines on one gel was performed once. For gel source data, see Supplementary Figure 1. b, Expression levels (TPM) of CD47 and APMAP in ten cell lines (data from CCLE). c, Survival measurements of selected (GFP+) cell lines in Fig. 3a, measured as percentage of GFP remaining after indicated number of hours of incubation with J774 macrophages in presence or absence of anti-CD47. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 4 cell culture wells, except Karpas-299 (n = 3)). One-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons correction. d, Phagocytosis assays as in Fig. 3a, but with isotype control antibodies. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 4 cell culture wells). One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. e, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled cells for indicated Cas9-expressing cell lines expressing indicated sgRNAs by J774 macrophages in the presence or absence of anti-EGFR/cetuximab antibodies. Phagocytosis index normalized to control (SafeKO) cells without anti-EGFR. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3 cell culture wells). One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. f, Survival measurements of selected (GFP+) cell lines in Extended Data Fig. 6e, measured as percentage of GFP remaining after indicated number of hours of incubation with J774 macrophages in presence or absence of anti-EGFR. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3 cell culture wells). One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. g, Representative photographs depicting Ramos tumours of indicated genotype extracted from NSG mice at 25 d following transplantation. h, SafeKO or APMAPKO Ramos cells were transplanted into NSG mice and allowed to form tumours. Mice were treated with anti-CD47 (B6H12, BioXCell) or PBS daily starting 17 d following transplantation, and tumour size was measured every 2 d. Data represent mean +/− s.e.m. (n = 5 (SafeKO groups) and 6 (APMAPKO groups)). Two-way ANOVA with Tukey correction (comparison between SafeKO/anti-CD47 and APMAPKO/anti-CD47 for final timepoint is shown). I, Mouse weights in Ramos (top) and NCI-H82 (bottom) xenograft experiments (Extended Data Fig. 6h, Fig. 3b). Data represent mean +/− s.d. Two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction (n = 5 (all NCI-H82 groups and Ramos SafeKO groups) and 6 (Ramos APMAPKO groups)). P-values are reported for the interaction between treatment groups. j, Single-cell suspensions were prepared from SafeKO or APMAPKO Ramos tumours treated with PBS or anti-CD20 (from experiment in Fig. 3c) and analysed for the presence of macrophages (CD45+/F4–80+/Cd11b+) as a percentage of all CD45+ cells. Gating strategy is shown (top/left). Data (bottom right) represent mean +/− s.e.m. (n = 6 (PBS groups) and 7 (antibody-treated groups)). One-way ANOVA with Tukey correction. k, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled B16-F10 cells with indicated genotypes by J774 macrophages in the presence or absence of anti-TRP1 antibodies. Phagocytosis index normalized to control (SafeKO) cells without antibody. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 4 cell culture wells). One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. l, In vitro growth of B16-F10 cells of indicated genotypes, measured using time-lapse microscopy as total confluence per well over 6 d. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 4 cell culture wells). m, SafeKO or APMAPKO B16-F10 cells were transplanted into syngeneic C57BL/6 mice and allowed to form tumours. Mice were treated with anti-TRP1 or mouse IgG2a isotype control antibody daily starting 5 d following transplantation, and tumour size was measured every 2 d. Data represent mean +/− s.e.m. (n = 7 for SafeKO groups, n = 6 for both APMAPKO groups). Two-way ANOVA with Tukey correction (comparison between SafeKO/anti-TRP1 and APMAPKO/anti-TRP1 for final timepoint is shown).
Genome-wide magnetic screen in J774 macrophages for phagocytosis of IgG-coated beads.
a, Schematic of genome-wide screen in J774 macrophages for phagocytosis of 2.8 micron IgG-coated magnetic beads. b, Volcano plot of screen diagrammed in a. Dotted line indicates 5% FDR. c. Replicates of screen diagrammed in a. d, Diagram of hits with negative effect size (i.e. required for phagocytosis) from genome-wide screen for IgG bead phagocytosis in J774 macrophages. e, Gene ontology enrichment analysis for macrophage IgG bead screen hits with negative effect size (required for phagocytosis) (5% FDR). Selected terms shown. n indicates number of genes among hits annotated with indicated term.
GPR84 is expressed in tumour associated macrophages.
a–d, Single-cell RNA-seq analyses of human tumours from patients with melanoma (a, b), patients with glioblastoma (c) and patients with sarcoma (d), showing cell type annotations (left) and detection of GPR84 (right). GPR84+ and GPR84− denote TPM > 0 and = 0, respectively; n denotes the number of cells shown.
Macrophage screens for genes required for enhanced uptake of APMAPKO cancer cells.
a, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Karpas-299-Cas9 cells expressing indicated sgRNAs, incubated with J774 macrophages expressing indicated sgRNAs, in the presence of anti-CD30 antibodies. Phagocytosis index (arbitrary units) corresponds to the total pHrodo Red signal per well, normalized to SafeKO Karpas-299 cells fed to SafeKO macrophages. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 4 cell culture wells). Two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. b, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos cells expressing indicated sgRNAs, incubated with U937 macrophages expressing indicated sgRNAs (three independent sgRNAs per gene), in the presence of anti-CD20 antibodies. Phagocytosis index (arbitrary units) corresponds to the total pHrodo Red signal per well, normalized to SafeKO Ramos cells fed to SafeKO−1 macrophages. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 4 cell culture wells). Two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction, P values for comparisons to SafeKO Ramos/SafeKO−1 U937 macrophages shown. c, Gating strategy for collecting single-positive and double-negative macrophage populations, corresponding to macrophages that phagocytosed calcein+ SafeKO or Far-red+ APMAPKO cells. d, Volcano plot for macrophage screen for genes required for uptake of SafeKO Ramos cells, using 2,208-gene sublibrary (enriched for phagocytosis genes, but lacking GPR84), conducted in J774 macrophages. Dotted line indicates 5% FDR. e, Volcano plot for macrophage screen for genes required for uptake of APMAPKO Ramos cells, using 2,208-gene sublibrary (enriched for phagocytosis genes, but lacking GPR84) in J774 macrophages. Dotted line indicates 5% FDR. f, Volcano plot for macrophage screen for genes required selectively for uptake of APMAPKO cells, following screen design in Fig. 4a (comparison 2), but using 2,208-gene sublibrary (enriched for phagocytosis genes, but lacking GPR84) in J774 macrophages, for uptake of calcein+ SafeKO cells and far-red+ APMAPKO Ramos cells. Dotted line indicates 5% FDR. g, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos cells expressing indicated sgRNAs, incubated with J774 macrophages expressing indicated sgRNAs, in the presence of anti-CD20 antibodies. Phagocytosis index (arbitrary units) corresponds to the total pHrodo Red signal per well, normalized to SafeKO Ramos cells fed to SafeKO macrophages. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3 cell culture wells). Two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. P-values correspond to comparisons to SafeKO-1. h, FACS-based phagocytosis assay for uptake of CellTrace Far-Red-labelled APMAPKO cells and calcein-labelled CD47KO Ramos cells by J774-Cas9 macrophages expressing indicated sgRNAs. Ratio of macrophages that phagocytosed APMAPKO Ramos cells to macrophages that phagocytosed CD47KO Ramos cells, normalized to SafeKO/SafeKO J774 macrophages, following 24 h co-incubation with anti-CD20 antibodies is plotted. Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3 cell culture wells). One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction, P-values for comparisons to SafeKO/SafeKO J774 macrophages shown.
GPR84 agonists stimulate uptake of antibody-opsonized cancer cells.
a, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos Cas9 cells expressing Safe-targeting sgRNAs by J774 macrophages in the presence of anti-CD20 antibodies and indicated concentrations of GPR84 agonists. Data represent mean (n = 2 cell culture wells). b, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos Cas9 cells expressing APMAP-targeting sgRNAs by J774 macrophages in the presence of anti-CD20 antibodies and indicated concentrations of GPR84 agonists. Data represent mean (n = 2 cell culture wells). c, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled SafeKO Ramos Cas9 cells by J774 macrophages in the presence (left) or absence (right) of anti-CD20 antibodies and 100 μM saturated fatty acids of indicated carbon chain length (n = 2, acetic acid; n = 10, capric acid; n = 16, palmitic acid; n = 22, docosanoic acid). Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 4 cell culture wells). One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. d, Heatmap of normalized phagocytosis index of Ramos cells incubated with U937 macrophages expressing indicated sgRNAs, in the presence of indicated concentrations of 6-OAU and anti-CD20. Data represent mean (n = 4 cell culture wells). e, Heatmap of normalized phagocytosis index of Ramos cells incubated with J774 macrophages expressing indicated sgRNAs, in the presence of indicated concentrations of 6-OAU and anti-CD47. Data represent mean (n = 4 cell culture wells). f, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos Cas9 cells expressing Safe-targeting sgRNAs by J774 macrophages in the presence of anti-CD20 antibodies and GPR84 agonists (100 μM capric acid, 100 nM 6-OAU, 10 nM ZQ-16). Data represent mean +/− s.d. (n = 3 cell culture wells). One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. P-values are for comparison to untreated condition for each macrophage genotype.
Supplementary Material
Competing interests R.A.K. and M.C.B., through the Office of Technology Licensing at Stanford University, have filed a patent application on the methods and findings in this manuscript. I.W. is an inventor on several patents in the field of ADCP induced by blockade of several don’t-eat-me signals such as CD47, CD24, beta-2-microglobulin, and PDL1, and their macrophage cognate receptors, respectively, SIRPα, Siglec-10, LILRB1, and PD1. These have been licensed to several companies. I.W. is not currently affiliated with these companies and does not hold stock in them. He is, however, engaged in the formation of one or more start-up companies in the field. J.S. licensed a patent to Forty Seven Inc./Gilead on the use of CD47 blocking strategies in SCLC.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03879-4.
Peer review information Nature thanks Ross Levine and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.
Genome-wide CRISPR screens reveal novel regulators of ADCP.
a, Schematic of the genome-wide CRISPR knockout (KO) screening strategy. b, Volcano plot of genome-wide screen in Ramos cells depicted in a. c, Schematic of the genome-wide CRISPR activation screening strategy. d, Volcano plot of genome-wide CRISPRa screen in Ramos cells depicted in c. e, Diagram of top 50 anti-phagocytic hits from CRISPR knockout (pink) and CRISPRa (blue) screens in Ramos cells. SIRPA, the macrophage receptor for CD47, is depicted in grey. f, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-Red-labelled Ramos CRISPRa cells expressing the indicated sgRNAs by J774 macrophages in the presence of anti-CD20 and anti-CD47 antibodies. The phagocytosis index was calculated as the total pHrodo Red signal (which increases in the low-pH environment of the lysosome) per well, normalized to signal in cells expressing a Safe-targeting control sgRNA (5 h timepoint) (n = 3 cell culture wells). Ctrl, control. g, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled RKO Cas9 cells expressing indicated sgRNAs by J774 macrophages in the presence or absence of anti-CD47 antibodies, normalized to signal in control (SafeKO) cells at the 5 h timepoint (n = 4 cell culture wells). h, Left, schematic of target cell–macrophage adhesion assay. See Methods for details. The proportion of Ramos cells expressing indicated sgRNAs bound to macrophages is plotted, normalized to Ramos cells expressing Safe-targeting control sgRNA (n = 3 cell culture wells). CytoD, cytochalasin D. i, Comparison of Ramos–anti-CD20 and Karpas-299–anti-CD30 ADCP screens. j, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos cells with indicated genotypes by human U937 macrophages in the presence of anti-CD20 antibodies, normalized to control (SafeKO) cells expressing an sgRNA targeting a non-functional genomic locus (n = 3 cell culture wells). In b, d, i, dotted lines indicate 5% false discovery rate (FDR). In f–h, j, data are mean ± s.d. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) (f, h) or two-way ANOVA (g, j) with Bonferroni correction.
APMAP loss synergizes with monoclonal antibodies and CD47 blockade to increase cancer cell susceptibility to phagocytosis.
a, Images of pHrodo-labelled GFP+ Ramos cells of indicated genotypes after 12 h incubation with J774 macrophages with or without anti-CD20. Scale bars, 50 μm. Representative of three biologically independent experiments. b, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos cells with indicated genotypes by J774 macrophages with indicated concentrations of anti-CD20, normalized to control (SafeKO) cells in absence of anti-CD20 (n = 4 replicate wells). c, Volcano plot of genome-wide CRISPR knockout screen in Karpas299-Cas9 cells for resistance to treatment with anti-CD47 and macrophages. Dotted line indicates 5% FDR. d, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos cells with indicated genotypes following incubation with J774 macrophages and anti-CD47 antibodies or mouse isotype control (mIgG1) antibodies, normalized to control (SafeKO) cells with isotype control antibody (n = 3 cell culture wells). e, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos cells expressing indicated sgRNAs, incubated for 2 h with J774 macrophages and anti-CD20, anti-CD47, or human (hIgG1) or mouse (mIgG1) isotype control antibodies, normalized to signal in control (SafeKO) cells in anti-CD20 or mIgG1-isotype condition (n = 3 cell culture wells). f, Top, schematic of APMAP structure. Bottom left, APMAP homology model (residues 61–407) (Methods). Bottom right, magnified view of catalytic site of APMAP homology model, showing predicted positioning of residue E103 near the catalytic calcium ion. TMD, transmembrane domain. g, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled indicated Ramos-Cas9 cells by J774 macrophages in the presence of anti-CD20 antibodies, normalized to control (SafeKO) cells (n = 3 cell culture wells). In b, d, e, g, data are mean ± s.d. One-way ANOVA (g) or two-way ANOVA (b, d, e) with Bonferroni correction.
APMAP loss sensitizes diverse tumour types to monoclonal antibodies in vitro and in mice.
a, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled cells for indicated Cas9-expressing cell lines—Ramos (B cell lymphoma), Karpas-299 (T cell lymphoma), HCT-116 (colorectal 1), RKO (colorectal 2), SKBR3 (breast), OVCAR8 (ovarian), K562 (leukaemia), NCI-H23 (non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC)), NCI-H82 (small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC)) and HeLa (cervical)—expressing indicated sgRNAs by J774 macrophages in the presence or absence of anti-CD47 antibodies. Phagocytosis index normalized to control (SafeKO) cells without anti-CD47. Data are mean ± s.d. (n = 4 cell culture wells for all but Karpas-299 and NCI-H82, for which n = 3). One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. b, SafeKO or APMAPKO NCI-H82 cells were transplanted into NSG mice and allowed to form tumours. Mice were treated with anti-CD47 or PBS daily starting 12 d after transplantation, and tumour size was measured every 2 d. Data are mean ± s.e.m. (n = 5). Two-way ANOVA with Tukey correction. c, SafeKO or APMAPKO Ramos cells were transplanted into NSG mice and allowed to form tumours. Mice were treated with anti-CD20 or PBS daily starting 21 d after transplantation, and tumour size was measured every 2 d. Data are mean ± s.e.m. (n = 6 (control groups) or 7 (antibody-treated groups)). Two-way ANOVA with Tukey correction.
GPR84 mediates enhanced uptake of APMAPKO cancer cells.
a, Schematic of macrophage screen, using a genome-wide CRISPR knockout library in J774 macrophages, for uptake of calcein+ SafeKO cells and far red+ APMAPKO Ramos cells. Req., required. b, Volcano plot of all genes required for uptake of APMAPKO cells (comparison 1 of screen depicted in a). c, Volcano plot of genes selectively required for uptake of APMAPKO cells relative to SafeKO cells (comparison 2 of screen depicted in a). d, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled Ramos-Cas9 cells expressing indicated sgRNAs, incubated with J774 macrophages expressing indicated sgRNAs, in the presence of anti-CD20 antibodies, normalized to Safe-1 macrophages with SafeKO Ramos cells (n = 4 culture wells). P values are for comparisons with Safe-1 macrophages for each Ramos cell type. e, Phagocytosis assay for uptake of pHrodo-labelled SafeKO Ramos cells, incubated with U937 macrophages, anti-CD20 antibodies and indicated GPR84 agonists at indicated concentrations, normalized to untreated cells (n = 4 cell culture wells). P values are for comparisons with untreated cells. f, Model for APMAP-mediated regulation of macrophage phagocytosis through GPR84, GNB2 and PREX1. The role of PREX1 as a coincidence detector for Gβ and phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P3) in Rac activation is indicated; the Rac-GEF domain of PREX1 is synergistically released from an autoinhibited state upon binding of these two ligands at distinct sites. The question mark indicates a putative role of APMAP enzymatic activity in preventing GPR84-dependent phagocytosis activation. FcR, Fc receptor; mAb, monoclonal antibody. Dotted lines in b, c indicate 5% FDR. In d, e, data are mean ± s.d. One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PMID 33676427 — Inhibition of ERAD synergizes with FTS to eradicate pancreatic cancer cells.
BMC cancer (2021) · https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33676427/

Inhibition of ERAD synergizes with FTS to eradicate pancreatic cancer cells
Background
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), one of the most lethal cancers, is driven by oncogenic KRAS mutations. Farnesyl thiosalicylic acid (FTS), also known as salirasib, is a RAS inhibitor that selectively dislodges active RAS proteins from cell membrane, inhibiting downstream signaling. FTS has demonstrated limited therapeutic efficacy in PDAC patients despite being well tolerated.
Methods
To improve the efficacy of FTS in PDAC, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR synthetic lethality screen to identify genetic targets that synergize with FTS treatment. Among the top candidates, multiple genes in the endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation (ERAD) pathway were identified. The role of ERAD inhibition in enhancing the therapeutic efficacy of FTS was further investigated in pancreatic cancer cells using pharmaceutical and genetic approaches.
Results
In murine and human PDAC cells, FTS induced unfolded protein response (UPR), which was further augmented upon treatment with a chemical inhibitor of ERAD, Eeyarestatin I (EerI). Combined treatment with FTS and EerI significantly upregulated the expression of UPR marker genes and induced apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells. Furthermore, CRISPR-based genetic ablation of the key ERAD components, HRD1 and SEL1L, sensitized PDAC cells to FTS treatment.
Conclusion
Our study reveals a critical role for ERAD in therapeutic response of FTS and points to the modulation of UPR as a novel approach to improve the efficacy of FTS in PDAC treatment.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12885-021-07967-6.
Background
The most prevalent pancreatic malignancy, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), is among the most aggressive cancers, with a dismal prognosis, and highly refractory to most treatment options. KRAS mutations have been identified as the oncogenic driver in PDAC. RAS is a membrane bound GTPase that functions as a molecular switch, cycling between active GTP-bound state facilitated by guanine nucleotide exchange factors, and inactive GDP-bound state regulated by GTPase-activating proteins. Upon activation of cell-surface receptors, RAS switches to the GTP-bound state to recruit and activate cytoplasmic effectors involved in a variety of signaling networks. Oncogenic mutations impair the ability of KRAS to hydrolyze GTP, and lock the oncoprotein in its constitutively active GTP-bound state, leading to hyperactivation of effector signaling pathways driving tumorigenesis.
Given its critical function as an oncogenic driver, extensive efforts have been devoted to the development of specific RAS inhibitors. However, the lack of binding sites for small chemical inhibitors on the RAS protein surface has hindered the efforts to directly target RAS. Furthermore, drugging RAS through the use of GTP antagonists has not been feasible due to the extremely high affinity (picomolar) to GTP and GTP abundance (millimolar) in cells. Failure to develop clinically-approved RAS inhibitors has prompted the perception that RAS proteins are “undruggable”. In recent years, exciting progresses have been made in directly targeting the rare KRASG12C mutant, but not the more prevalent mutations, such as G12D, G12V, and G12R.
RAS proteins undergo a series of post-translational modifications related to their biological functions such as acetylation, ubiquitination, phosphorylation, and farnesylation among many. Localization of KRAS on plasma membrane is crucial to downstream signal transduction, and farnesylation at C-terminal cysteine (CAAX motif) is essential for its localization and activation. Farnesyl thiosalicylic acid (FTS), also known as salirasib, was developed as a pan-RAS inhibitor. FTS mimics the C-terminal farnesyl cysteine carboxymethyl ester of all RAS isoforms and selectively dislodges active RAS proteins from cell membrane, inhibiting their biological functions. Promising findings in preclinical models have prompted several clinical trials in leukemia, lung, and pancreatic cancers. However, FTS alone has shown only modest activity in patients despite minimal side effects, suggesting further efforts to develop FTS for the treatment of PDAC should be focused on drug combinations to enhance the therapeutic efficacy.
Combinatorial strategies, such as coupled targeting of KRAS and mitochondrial respiration pathways, or concomitant suppression of ERK and autophagy, have been proposed for PDAC treatment with the goal of achieving better therapeutic responses. The concept of synthetic lethality has been widely exploited in the development of targeted therapeutics and combination therapies. The conceptual framework posits that, two perturbations are considered synthetic lethal if either one acting alone is compatible with viability, but when combined, will lead to cell death. Functional genetic approaches, such as RNAi and CRISPR screens, have been employed to discover novel genetic targets of synthetic lethality and identify combination therapies. In particular, CRISPR-Cas9 genome-wide screens have superior efficiency and increased specificity. We, therefore, set out to identify genetic targets that enhance FTS efficacy in PDAC by performing a genome-wide CRISPR synthetic lethality screen. Among the top candidates, genes related to endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation (ERAD) were highly enriched. Moreover, we showed that FTS induced unfolded protein response (UPR) in murine and human PDAC cells, which was further enhanced by suppression of ERAD to induce apoptosis.
Methods
Cell lines and chemical reagents
4292 murine PDAC cell line, expressing mutant KRASG12D under the control of the Tet-ON system, and p53R172H, was a generous gift from Dr. Marina Pasca di Magliano at the University of Michigan. 4292 cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and 1 μg/ml doxycycline. Human PDAC cell lines, PANC-1 and MIA PaCa-2, were purchased from ATCC and cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. FTS, Eeyarestatin I, and GSK2606414 were purchased from Cayman Chemical.
Pooled “synthetic lethal” CRISPR screen and data analysis
The CRISPR library screen was performed following published protocols. The pooled mouse CRISPR lentiviral library containing 78,637 gRNAs targeting 19,674 genes was obtained from Addgene (#73633-LV, lentiviral prep), and the screen was performed in duplicate with two independent viral infections. Briefly, 4292 cells with stable Cas9 expression were infected at low viral titers so that approximately 10% of the cells were infected. The infected cells were selected with puromycin (1 μg/ml) for 2 days. The experimental pool was treated with 100 μM FTS for 12 days. Both experimental and control pools were passaged every 3 days with at least 50 million cells per pool to ensure 500-1000X coverage. Following FTS treatment, the gRNA libraries in the cell populations were isolated by PCR amplification and identified by Hiseq. Computational analysis of the libraries was performed using MAGeCK (version 0.5.9.2). First, cutadapt (version 2.6) was used to trim primer and other technical sequences from paired-end FASTQ files with the specified options: -j 0 --maximum-length 30 --pair-filter = both -e 0.3 -g GCTTTATATATCTTGTGGAAAGGACGAAACACC…GTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAGTTAAAATAAGGCTAGTCCGTTATCAACTTGAAAAAGT -G CCGACTCGGTGCCACTTTTTCAAGTTGATAACGGACTAGCCTTATTTTAACTTGCTATTTCTAGCTCTAAAAC…GGTGTTTCGTCCTTTCCACAAGATATATAAAGC. Second, the command, mageck count, was run under default options with the trimmed paired-end FASTQ files supplied in the arguments --fastq and --fastq-2 to collect read counts. Finally, the command, mageck mle, was run, specifying an unpaired design for the biological duplicates, 10 permutation rounds, 2500 genes for mean-variance modeling, the --remove-outliers option, median normalization, FDR p-value adjustment, and a list of the 1000 control sgRNAs in the library supplied to the --control-sgrna option. The resulting beta scores and FDR-adjusted permutation p-values were used in downstream analysis. All samples had a mapping rate of 89–90.2%, gini index (a measure of the evenness of sgRNA read counts) of 0.066–0.072, and 384–502 zero-count sgRNAs. Enrichr was used for gene ontology (GO) analysis of genes with a negative beta score and an FDR < 0.05 (n = 488 genes). The visualization tool, Clustergrammer, was used to graphically depict the top 20 GO terms (as ranked by p-value) and their associated genes.
IC50 determination and cell viability assay
Cells were seeded at the following concentrations: 4000 cells for 4292, 16,000 cells for PANC-1, 8000 cells for MIA PaCa-2 per well in 24-well plates. Drugs were added the next day in triplicates. Following 5 days of drug treatment, cell viability was assessed using the CellTiter-Glo 2.0 Cell Viability Assay (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Data analysis and calculation of the half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) were carried out using GraphPad Prism 8 (GraphPad).
Western blot analysis
Cells were lysed on ice in CelLytic MT Cell Lysis Reagent (Sigma) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Protein concentration was determined with Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher). Protein lysates were resolved on SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to PVDF membranes. The following antibodies were used for the western blot analysis: phospho-eIF2α (#9721, 1:1000), eIF2α (#9722, 1:1000), ATF4 (#11815, 1:1000), BIM (#2819, 1:1000), SYVN1 (#14773, 1:1000) from Cell Signaling Technology; phospho-PERK (Thr980) (MA5–15033, 1:1000, Thermo Fisher); SEL1L (S3699, 1:1000, Sigma); β-tubulin (10094–1-AP, 1:5000, Proteintech).
RNA extraction and quantitative real-time PCR
RNA was extracted with the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). cDNA was synthesized using the Verso cDNA Synthesis Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. qPCR analysis was performed on a 7500 Real-Time PCR System using SYBR Green (Applied Biosystems). Primer sequences are available in Supplementary Table 3. Transcripts were normalized to human GAPDH or mouse UBC, and relative gene expression was determined with ddCt method as previously reported.
Flow cytometry
PE Annexin-V Apoptosis Detection Kit (BD Biosciences) was used to detect apoptosis following manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, cells were suspended in 100 μl of 1X binding buffer and mixed with 5 μl of PE-conjugated annexin-V and 7-AAD respectively, followed by incubation at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. The stained cells were analyzed using a BD FACS Fortessa flow cytometer (BD Bioscience). All flow cytometric data were analyzed with FlowJo software (Tree Star).
CRISPR sgRNA generation, transfection and single-cell sorting
For construction of sgRNA-expressing vectors, DNA oligonucleotides were annealed and cloned in BbsI-digested pSpCas9(BB)-2A-GFP (PX458) plasmid (Addgene #48138). Target sgRNA oligonucleotide sequences are listed in Supplementary Table 4. MIA PaCa-2 cells were seeded in 6-well plates at 0.5 million/well the day before transfection. PX458 empty vector or pooled sgRNA plasmids (2.5 μg/well) were transfected into MIA PaCa-2 cells using lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen). Three days after transfection, cells were collected and GFP-positive cells were sorted in 96-well plate using a BD FACS Fortessa flow cytometer (BD Bioscience).
Retrovirus packaging and transduction
Retroviral vectors for the expression of fluorescent markers were combined with pCL-10A1 retrovirus packaging vector at 1:1 ratio and transfected into HEK293FT cells using lipofectamine 3000 transfection reagent (Invitrogen). Supernatants containing the viral particles were collected at 48 h post-transfection and passed through a sterile 0.45 μm syringe filter (VWR). Wild type, SYVN1 KO1, and SEL1L KO1 cells were infected by viral supernatant supplemented with 6 μg/ml polybrene in 6-well plate by centrifugation at 1000 g for 90 min. Infected cells were selected by growing in DMEM medium containing 3 μg/ml puromycin for 2 days.
Multicolor competition assay
pBabe puro IRES-mCherry (Addgene #128038) and pBabe puro IRES-EGFP (Addgene #128037) were used for labeling. MIA PaCa-2-derived single clones labeled with mCherry (wild type) and GFP (SYVN1 KO1 or SEL1L KO1) were mixed at 1:1 ratio. Mixed cell populations were seeded in T25 flasks at 0.2 million cells per cell line. One day after seeding (D0) wells were imaged with Leica DMi8 with a 5X objective and mCherry and GFP positive cells were counted from three different images. Cells were treated with DMSO or FTS for 2 weeks. Relative cell fitness was calculated from the percentage of GFP-positive cells normalized to the D0 value.
Statistical analysis
Cell viability and apoptotic cell percentage among different treatment groups were analyzed using ANOVA with Tukey’s test. Other viability assays and transcript levels were analyzed using two-tailed student’s t test. Statistical significance of multicolor competition assay was assessed using unpaired two-sample t test. Results were presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD).
Results
CRISPR screen identifies ERAD as a cellular process modulating FTS efficacy
CRISPR screening identifies ERAD as a target modulating the efficacy of FTS. a Basic flow of the genome-wide CRISPR screen for genes modulating FTS sensitivity. b Gene Ontology (GO) pathway analysis of genes with gRNA dropouts upon FTS treatment. c Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) showing enrichment of genes in the ERAD pathway indicated by the enrichment score and p-value. d Gene dropout rank based on beta score. Top ERAD pathway genes were labeled. Blue color depicted gene dropouts with FDR < 0.05
To discover potential genetic targets that modify sensitivity to FTS, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR library screen utilizing a murine pooled sgRNA library. Cas9 nuclease was introduced in the murine PDAC cell line 4292 by lentiviral infection, followed by the sgRNA library, which contains 78,637 gRNAs targeting 19,674 genes. Following puromycin selection, the cell population containing the gRNA library was further expanded and split into control and FTS pools. FTS pool was treated with the drug for 12 days, while the control pool was maintained in culture. At the end of the treatment, genomic DNA from both pools was collected for PCR amplification of sgRNA libraries and further analysis of sgRNA frequency by deep-sequencing (Fig. 1a). A “beta score” was calculated for each gene to measure the degree of selection using MAGeCK’s maximum likelihood estimation algorithm (Supplementary Table 1). The beta score quantifies the effect size with negative values suggesting sgRNA depletion and positive values suggesting sgRNA enrichment.
To identify mutations that specifically enhance FTS efficacy, we searched for sgRNAs that were further depleted (with a negative beta score) upon FTS treatment. Gene Ontology (GO) pathway analysis based on false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted p-values of less than 0.05 pointed to several pathways in regulating the FTS response, including mitochondrial respiratory chain, protein retrograde transport from ER to cytosol, and proteasome-mediated ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolic processes (Fig. 1b, Supplementary Table 2). In particular, sgRNAs targeting various ERAD-related genes, including Ube2g2, Faf2, Syvn1, Sel1l, Aup1, and Derl2, were significantly depleted from the FTS pool (Fig. 1c-d). These molecules are essential components of ERAD, a process responsible for the clearance of misfolded proteins in the ER through cytosolic translocation and proteasomal degradation. Retro-translocation of ERAD substrates across the ER membrane is mediated by the HRD1-SEL1L complex, representing the most conserved ERAD machinery. The E3 ligase HRD1 (encoded by Syvn1) forms a translocation channel while SEL1L functions as the adaptor protein. A member of Derlin family of proteins, DERL2, is an essential functional partner of HRD1-SEL1L complex. Another ERAD-related protein, AUP1, recruits the E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBE2G2 during the ubiquitination of substrates. Following retro-translocation and polyubiquitination, substrates are extracted from the ER membrane by the AAA ATPase VCP/p97 complex and transferred to the cytosolic proteasome for degradation. Another component, UBXD8 (encoded by Faf2) is an ER membrane-embedded recruitment factor for VCP/p97. Thus, our CRISPR screen identifies multiple key components of ERAD, pointing to ERAD as a major pathway affecting the therapeutic efficacy of FTS.
ERAD inhibition synergizes with FTS to activate ER stress and induce apoptosis
EerI synergizes with FTS to kill PDAC cells through apoptosis induction. a, c, e Bright field images (200X) of 4292, PANC-1, and MIA PaCa-2 cells treated with 100 μM FTS, EerI, or both for five days. EerI (μM) concentrations were indicated above each figure. Scale bar, 25 μm. b, d, f Relative cell viability following five days of treatment with FTS, EerI, or both. ANOVA with Tukey’s test compares the viability difference between combination and single treatments or controls. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001; data are presented as mean ± SD; n = 3). g Representative flow cytometric analysis of PDAC cell apoptosis following treatments with 100 μM FTS, EerI (3 μM for 4292, 2.5 μM for PANC-1 and MIA PaCa-2), or both for five days. Cells were stained with annexin-V and 7-AAD. Percentages of apoptotic cells were indicated in the quadrants. h PDAC cell death analysis following different treatments with Annexin V/7-AAD apoptosis assay. ANOVA with Tukey’s test compares difference treatment groups. ***P < 0.001; data presented as mean ± SD; n = 3.
To determine whether inhibition of ERAD could synergize with FTS treatment to induce cell death in PDAC cells, we combined an ERAD inhibitor, Eeyarestatin I (EerI), with FTS. EerI acts through the inhibition of VCP/p97, which mediates the translocation of misfolded proteins from ER to cytosol for proteasomal degradation. We treated three PDAC cell lines (murine 4292, human PANC-1 and MIA PaCa-2) with FTS, EerI, or both for 5 days, and assessed cell survival by microscopic observation and viability assay. While FTS only modestly reduced the viability of PDAC cells, combined treatment with EerI and FTS drastically decreased cell viability (Fig. 2). Berenbaum combination index (CI) showed CI values of less than 1 for all the cell lines, confirming a synergistic effect on combined treatment (Supplementary Fig. S1).
Activation of UPR by FTS is further enhanced upon ERAD inhibition to elicit ER stress-induced apoptosis. a Protein expression of UPR markers (p-PERK, p-eIF2α, ATF4) in PDAC cells treated with 100 μM FTS for 72 h. b Changes in transcript levels of UPR marker genes (XBP1s, ATF4, CHOP, and GADD34) following treatment with 100 μM FTS, EerI (3 μM for 4292 and MIA PaCa-2, 2 μM for PANC-1), or both for 8 and 24 h. All mRNA values were normalized to human GAPDH or mouse UBC. Two-tailed student’s t test compares transcriptional difference between combination and single treatments or control at the same timepoint, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01; data presented as mean ± SD; n = 3. c Protein expression of BIM isoforms in PDAC cells in response to treatments with FTS, EerI, or the combination for 48 h. d Pretreatment with PERKi (2.5 μM GSK2606414) for two hours partially blocked the cell death induced by the combined FTS and EerI treatment for five days. Two-tailed student’s t test, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001; relative cell viability are presented as mean ± SD; n = 3
Tumor cells are exposed to intrinsic and environmental factors, such as oncogene activation, hypoxia, glucose deprivation, and lactic acidosis, which perturb protein homeostasis and lead to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. To relieve ER stress and restore proteostasis, tumor cells have adopted a specific stress response pathway, UPR, that includes three main branches initiated by IRE1α, PERK, and ATF6. The signaling pathways in the three branches cooperate to reduce protein translation and enhance the ER-folding capacity. Additionally, the ERAD pathway is activated to translocate and degrade the misfolded proteins accumulated in the ER. Notably, ERAD and UPR are engaged in a crosstalk, in which, UPR triggers ERAD, while impaired ERAD activates UPR. FTS has been reported to induce ER stress in MYC-amplified cancer cells as indicated by upregulation of UPR markers. Analysis of gene expression profiles in FTS-treated cancer cells points to the upregulation of stress response genes, such as ATF3 and ATF4. We demonstrated that inhibition of ERAD, a downstream cellular process triggered by UPR, enhanced FTS efficacy, suggesting that FTS likely induces UPR in the KRAS-driven PDAC tumor cells. Therefore, we examined UPR in these PDAC cells. Intriguingly, FTS treatment induced sustained UPR in all three PDAC cell lines, shown by increased levels of phospho-PERK (p-PERK), phospho-eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2α (p-eIF2α), and ATF4 (Fig. 3a, Supplementary Fig. S2).
EerI was reported to induce accumulation of misfolded proteins and UPR in cancer cells by blocking ERAD and/or inhibiting Sec61 complex-mediated translocation of newly synthesized chaperones from cytosol to the ER. To determine the effect of combined FTS-Eer1 treatment on UPR, we examined the mRNA levels of multiple UPR marker genes. Compared to treatment with FTS or EerI alone, combined treatment elicited UPR hyperactivation through IRE1α and PERK branches, as indicated by the dramatic increase in XBP1s, ATF4, CHOP, and GADD34 transcripts (Fig. 3b). Notably, ATF4/CHOP signaling, known to induce apoptotic cell death, was significantly enhanced by the combined treatment.
Current data support proadaptive as well as proapoptotic roles for UPR. Homeostatic UPR signaling may promote tumor progression by supporting tumor cell survival and resistance to chemotherapy and radiation therapy. However, in cases where ER stress remains overwhelmingly unresolved, activation of a terminal UPR program will lead to cell death. Apoptosis following ER stress can be mediated by multiple mechanisms. In particular, hyperactivation of the PERK/eIF2α/ATF4 pathway induces apoptosis through the regulation of proapoptotic transcription factor CHOP and Bcl-2 family proteins. Consistent with the upregulation of ATF4/CHOP upon combined treatment with FTS and EerI, significant apoptosis was observed in murine and human PDAC cell lines as detected by the Annexin V/7-AAD apoptosis assay (Fig. 2g-h). Thus, we show that combined treatment synergizes to induce apoptosis in PDAC tumor cells. Bcl-2 homology 3 (BH3)-only proapoptotic proteins, such as BIM and NOXA, are regulated by ATF4/CHOP signaling and mediate ER stress-induced apoptosis. Indeed, BIM protein was significantly upregulated upon combination treatment in PDAC cells (Fig. 3c, Supplementary Fig. S2). Pretreatment of PDAC cells with a PERK inhibitor (PERKi), GSK2606414, partially blocked the induction of cell death by the combined treatment (Fig. 3d), suggesting that activation of PERK/eIF2α/ATF4/CHOP proapoptotic pathway contributes to the synergistic cell death.
Genetic knockout of SYVN1 and SEL1L sensitizes PDAC cells to FTS treatment
Knockout of SYVN1 and SEL1L sensitizes PDAC cells to FTS treatment through proapoptotic UPR. a Validation of SYVN1 and SEL1L CRISPR knockouts by western blot analysis of single clones derived from MIA PaCa-2 cells. b Relative cell viability of wild type control and SYVN1 and SEL1L KO clones treated with 25-125 μM FTS for five days. Two-tailed student’s t test, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001; data are presented as mean ± SD; n = 3. c Representative images of multicolor competition assay (50X) in the presence of 125 μM FTS. Scale bar, 100 μm. d Quantitative analysis of MCA for SYVN1 KO1 and SEL1L KO1 cell following FTS treatment. Unpaired two-sample t test, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001; data are presented as mean ± SD; n = 3. e Changes in transcript levels of UPR markers (XBP1s, ATF4, CHOP, and GADD34) in wild type control, SYVN1 KO1 and SEL1L KO1 cells following treatment with 100 μM FTS for 48 h. All mRNA values were normalized to human GAPDH. Two-tailed student’s t test compares transcriptional difference between KO clones and WT control at the same timepoint, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001; data are presented as mean ± SD; n = 3. (F) BIM protein expression in wild type control, SYVN1 KO1, and SEL1L KO1 cells following treatment with 100 μM FTS for 72 h
HRD1-SEL1L complex is an essential component of ERAD pathway. HRD1, encoded by SYVN1 gene, is an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in processing of misfolded proteins. SEL1L is an HRD1 adaptor protein, and indispensable for ERAD. To demonstrate genetically that inhibition of ERAD indeed enhances the FTS therapeutic efficacy, we knocked out SYVN1 and SEL1L genes in MIA PaCa-2 cells utilizing the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Complete loss of SYVN1 and SEL1L expression was confirmed by Western blot analysis and genomic DNA sequencing (Fig. 4a, Supplementary Fig. S3–4). We tested three individual knockout (KO) clones for each gene (Fig. 4a) and demonstrated that these clones exhibited increased sensitivity to FTS treatment (Fig. 4b). To further examine the drug sensitivity in the knockout clones, we performed a multicolor competition assay (MCA), in which the mCherry-labeled wild type control clone was co-cultured with GFP-labeled SYVN1 KO1 or SEL1L KO1 clones at a 1:1 ratio, and treated with either vehicle or FTS for 2 weeks. Compared to the non-treated population, the FTS-treated cells showed predominance of mCherry-labeled wild type cells, indicating increased vulnerability of SYVN1 and SEL1L deficient cells (Fig. 4c-d). Thus, PDAC cells with genetic defects in the ERAD machinery are more sensitive to FTS treatment.
Schematic model of the synthetic lethal effects of FTS and ERAD inhibition. Following FTS treatment, UPR is drastically enhanced by ERAD inhibition, eliciting unresolved ER stress and apoptosis
In SYVN1 and SEL1L KO cells, increased sensitivity to FTS coincided with increased level of ER stress. SYVN1 KO1 and SEL1L KO1 cells treated with FTS showed dramatic upregulation of UPR marker genes, including XBP1s, ATF4, CHOP, and GADD34 (Fig. 4e), suggesting that cells with genetic defects in ERAD are more prone to proapoptotic UPR. Furthermore, expression of the pro-apoptotic protein BIM, in particular the BIM L isoform, was strongly induced in these clones following FTS treatment (Fig. 4f, Supplementary Fig. S4), pointing to the induction of apoptosis by the hyperactive ER stress. In summary, using both pharmacological and genetic approaches, we demonstrate that targeting ERAD improves the therapeutic efficacy of FTS through increased activation of ER stress and the subsequent induction of apoptosis (Fig. 5).
Discussion
Using a genome-wide CRISPR synthetic lethal screen, we have identified ERAD as a key cellular target to enhance FTS efficacy. We show that FTS treatment induces ER stress, which is further amplified by inhibition of ERAD, resulting in synergistic induction of apoptosis in PDAC cells (Fig. 5). In pancreatic cancer, a highly desmoplastic stroma leads to hypoxia and nutrients deprivation. Therefore, pancreatic cancer is more vulnerable to the induction of ER stress. Consequently, therapeutic options that promote ER stress and activate apoptosis may be exploited for PDAC treatment. We have identified one such therapeutic approach by combining FTS and ERAD inhibitors, the efficacy of which, may be examined in vivo for the treatment of PDAC. Similarly, FTS may be combined with other ER stress inducers, such as proteasome inhibitors, to generate severe ER stress and tumor cell apoptosis. Combined use of FTS and gemcitabine has been empirically examined for clinical pancreatic cancer treatment. Our study on the mechanisms of drug synergy will provide new options for future PDAC treatments. Recent studies suggest that resolution of ER stress leads to tumor proliferation and formation of metastases from the disseminated PDAC cells. Under constitutive ER stress, metastatic cells may remain dormant and fail to develop overt tumor masses. In this light, the combined use of FTS and ERAD inhibitors, may serve as a novel therapeutic option against metastatic PDAC.
Regulation of tumor cell survival following ER stress is complicated. Our study argues that FTS-induced ER stress is relieved by activation of proadaptive UPR and ERAD, while ERAD inhibition through induction of ER stress, leads to hyperactivation of PERK/eIF2α/ATF4/CHOP/BIM proapoptotic pathway and massive cell death. Additionally, activation of IRE1α signaling pathway can recruit TRAF2 and JNK to induce cell death, or contribute to apoptosis through regulation of IRE1-dependent decay (RIDD). On the other hand, proapoptotic mediators, such as ATF4 and CHOP, have been shown to activate multiple autophagy genes as a pro-survival response to counteract the ER stress. Thus, cell fate control following ER stress may depend on the fine-tuning of UPR, and the crosstalk between UPR, ERAD, autophagy, and apoptosis.
Our CRISPR screen has identified additional targets that may enhance the FTS therapeutic efficacy. In a transgenic mouse model of pancreatic cancer, cell survival following KRAS ablation depends on mitochondrial function, especially oxidative phosphorylation. In this regard, our study has identified several genes encoding mitochondria complex I subunits, mitochondria complex II subunits, as well as the mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster assembly machinery. Additionally, we identified Sptlc1, Sptlc2, and Kdsr genes, encoding the serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT) and 3-ketodihydrosphingosine reductase (KDHR), among the top candidates. SPT and KDHR serve as essential enzymes in the initial steps of de novo sphingolipid synthesis. As sphingolipids are structural components of plasma membrane, inhibition of sphingolipid metabolism may mislocalize oncogenic KRAS and abolish its signaling. Our findings suggest that multiple approaches to dislodge KRAS from plasma membrane may be combined to abrogate oncogenic KRAS signaling. Other candidate genetic targets in our screen are involved in apoptosis, mTOR signaling, and fatty acids and selenoprotein metabolism. Further studies will examine the role of these genetic targets in modulating FTS efficacy in the treatment of PDAC.
Conclusion
Using both genetic and pharmacological approaches, we have demonstrated a critical role for ERAD in enhancing the FTS therapeutic response. The combined use of FTS and ERAD inhibitors may be an effective therapeutic option for the treatment of PDAC.
Supplementary Information
Abbreviations
PDAC
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
CRISPR
Clusters of regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
FTS
Farnesyl thiosalicylic acid
EerI
Eeyarestatin I
UPR
Unfolded protein response
ERAD
Endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation
IC50
Half-maximal inhibitory concentration
qPCR
Quantitative real-time PCR
GFP
Green fluorescent protein
MCA
Multicolor competition assay
GO
Gene Ontology
GSEA
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
CI
Combination index
p-eIF2α
Phospho-eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2α
p-PERK
Phospho-PERK
PERKi
PERK inhibitor
KO
Knockout
SPT
Serine palmitoyltransferase
KDHR
3-ketodihydrosphingosine reductase
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Authors’ contributions
R.D., N.G.A, and Y.L. developed the study. R.D. performed the molecular and cell biology experiments. N.G.A. carried out the CRISPR FTS synthetic lethal screens. D.K.S. analyzed the CRISPR screening data. R.D. and Y.L. wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
This work was supported in part by NIH/NCI K22CA207598 (Y.L.), CPRIT RP200472 (Y.L.), and NIH GM008042 (D.K.S.; UCLA-Caltech Medical Scientist Training Program).
Availability of data and materials
CRISPR screen data is available at GEO accession number GSE162065.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
Consent for publication is not needed as no patient data are included in this study.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PMID 37059858 — A multi-omics integrative analysis based on CRISPR screens re-defines the pluripotency regulatory network in ESCs.
Communications biology (2023) · https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37059858/

A multi-omics integrative analysis based on CRISPR screens re-defines the pluripotency regulatory network in ESCs
A comprehensive and precise definition of the pluripotency gene regulatory network (PGRN) is crucial for clarifying the regulatory mechanisms in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Here, after a CRISPR/Cas9-based functional genomics screen and integrative analysis with other functional genomes, transcriptomes, proteomes and epigenome data, an expanded pluripotency-associated gene set is obtained, and a new PGRN with nine sub-classes is constructed. By integrating the DNA binding, epigenetic modification, chromatin conformation, and RNA expression profiles, the PGRN is resolved to six functionally independent transcriptional modules (CORE, MYC, PAF, PRC, PCGF and TBX). Spatiotemporal transcriptomics reveal activated CORE/MYC/PAF module activity and repressed PRC/PCGF/TBX module activity in both mouse ESCs (mESCs) and pluripotent cells of early embryos. Moreover, this module activity pattern is found to be shared by human ESCs (hESCs) and cancers. Thus, our results provide novel insights into elucidating the molecular basis of ESC pluripotency.
An extended pluripotency gene regulatory network in mouse embryonic stem cells was proposed based on the integrative analysis of CRISPR/Cas9-based functional genomics screens and multi-omics data.
Introduction
Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) have multilineage differentiation potential, and can proliferate indefinitely under defined conditions in vitro. Therefore, ESCs provide an excellent model system for studying early developmental events of embryogenesis and abundant biological materials for regenerative medicine or cell therapy. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of pluripotency maintenance not only promotes advances in the applications of ESCs, but also facilitates the progress of induction of pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology and cancer research.
The maintenance of pluripotency and self-renewal of ESCs require specific extrinsic signals and a hierarchical, interconnected gene network. The core transcription factors (TFs) Nanog, Sox2, and Oct4 act as central units, together with other pluripotency factors, such as Myc, Esrrb, Klf4, Prdm14, Stat3, Smad and Tbx3, to form the pluripotency gene regulatory network (PGRN), which directly controls the ESC-specific gene transcription program. These TFs can form large protein complexes by physically interacting with each other and associate with epigenetic factors to regulate their targets co-operatively. Therefore, the ESC-specific gene regulation program is more efficiently explained by complex regulatory interactions of numerous factors in the PGRN than by the roles of individual independent genes.
Previous studies have suggested that the PGRN can be divided into sub-classes, such as the CORE, MYC and PRC classes, according to co-occupancy targets of TFs and epigenetic factors. These sub-classes are functionally independent and serve as hubs of the PGRN by integrating transcriptional signals to regulate the specific gene sets and function. Comprehensive analysis and precise definition of the regulatory sub-units of the PGRN are crucial for elucidating the regulatory mechanisms of pluripotency in ESCs. To this end, several attempts have been made to construct a more detailed PGRN. These studies have extended the PGRN primarily by adding target genes that are highly expressed in ESCs or that physically interact with previously known factors. However, high expression and physical interactions cannot guarantee their essentiality in regulating pluripotency. Additionally, insufficient omics data and analysis methodology also limit deciphering the gene regulatory landscape. Therefore, an understanding of the pluripotency regulation network remains largely incomplete.
Recently, the successful application of CRISPR-Cas9-based gene knockout in eukaryotic cells has provided a new option for functional genomics screening. This technology allows direct modifications of genomic loci, showing high knockout efficiency and low off-target effects. Moreover, numerous omics data available in public databases including transcriptomics, proteomics, epigenomics and chromatin conformation maps, have facilitated the delineation of protein-protein or protein-DNA interaction networks and have promoted the identification of global target genes for TFs. These tools have enabled researchers to develop a more comprehensive understanding of transcriptional networks and to clarify the mutual cooperation and regulation mechanism between genes.
In the present study, through a CRISPR/Cas9-mediated functional genomics screen and multi-omics integrative analysis, we established a new PGRN containing six independent transcriptional modules (CORE, MYC, PAF, PRC, PCGF and TBX). Furthermore, we characterized the activity pattern and functions of the re-defined modules in early embryo development, m/hESCs and cancer cells.
Results
Genome-scale CRISPR screen to identify regulators that maintain mESC pluripotency
CRISPR/Cas9-based knockout screen in mESC pluripotency maintenance.
a Schematic of loss-of-function screening with the Brie library. b Distributions of the number of reads per sgRNA in the library (grey), and the P.Sc_d0_r1 (blue) and P.Sc_d0_r2 (red) samples. c Scatter plots comparing the sgRNA read counts in the plasmid library and P.Sc_d0 samples. Red and blue lines indicate that 0.7% and 0.6% of the sgRNAs have undetectable representations (less than 10 reads). d Heatmap of Pearson correlation coefficients among the library and the P.Sc_d0 (with two biological replicates r1 and r2) and P.Sc_d14 (with two biological replicates r1 and r2) samples. e Comparisons of gene read counts between the P.Sc_d0 and P.Sc_d14 samples. The red dots represent expressed genes (>0.5 reads per kilobase per million mapped reads (RPKM)), and the blue dots represent low-/non-expressed genes (≤0.5 RPKM) in mESCs. f Biological processes enriched in the negative selection genes. Top 10 enrichment terms are presented. g The column chart indicates the numbers of genes involved in the fundamental cellular processes. Observed, genes identified in negative selection. All, all the genes involved in the cellular processes (KEGG database). h The fold changes of the sgRNAs targeting the “ribosome”, “core TFs”, “low expression” and “non-essential” genes (Supplementary Data 4) in the P.Sc_d14 samples relative to the P.Sc_d0 samples. The data are represented as log2 FC (fold change of sgRNA read count). p values were calculated using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. i Expression levels of the “core TFs”, “Top 1000” (top 1000 genes ranked by MAGeCK), “Top 100” (top 100 genes ranked by MAGeCK), “all genes” and “non-essential” genes in mESCs (Supplementary Data 4). The values are represented as log10(RPKM + 1). p values were calculated using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. j A volcano plot of the screen results. The blue/red dots indicate the negative/positive selection genes with an absolute sgRNA Log2fold change >0.5 and FDR < 10%.
To establish a function-based PGRN, we first performed a CRISPR-Cas9 mediated genome-wide screen to detect genes essential for self-renewal. mESCs were cultured under Leukaemia inhibitory factors (LIF)/serum condition (L/S), which was commonly used in similar tasks and confer a naïve state to pluripotency. For a comprehensive screen, the Brie library was chosen, which can target 19,674 genes, with high coverage across the genome. Cas9-expressing R1 ESCs were infected with lentiviruses containing the library. The cells were propagated in L/S culture and collected on day 0 (P.Sc_0d) and day 14 (P.Sc_14d) post-screen (Fig. 1a). We sequenced the pre-transfected plasmid library and the P.Sc_0d and P.Sc_14d cell samples. The results revealed the presence of 99.79% single-guided RNA (sgRNA) in the plasmid library and a mean of 166 reads per sgRNA (Fig. 1b). In the P.Sc_0d samples, the sgRNA presentations were 99.49% and 99.40% in two biological replicates (Fig. 1b), correlating highly with the plasmid representation (r = 0.73 on average) (Fig. 1c, d). The sgRNA representations of the P.Sc_14d samples also showed high concordance between biological replicates (Fig. 1d). The sgRNAs with significantly increased or decreased abundance were almost exclusively observed for expressed genes (RPKM > 0.5). The abundances of the sgRNAs targeting non-/low- expressed genes (RPKM ≤ 0.5) remained the same as the initial pool (P.Sc_0d) (Fig. 1e).
Using MAGeCK, we detected 2930 genes whose sgRNAs were depleted, suggesting those as genes required for mESC fitness, as well as 1384 genes whose sgRNAs were enriched, indicating genes harmful to the self-renewal of mESCs (Supplementary Data 1). Despite statistical differences, the positive selection genes showed low fold-change values (only 14 genes with log2-Fold Change ≥1) and were mostly related to growth restriction and lineage development. Thus, we focused on the negative selection genes that were essential for self-renewal maintenance of mESCs. These genes were distributed across all chromosomes without enrichment in specific chromosomal regions (Supplementary Fig. 1a). A total of 44.3% of the identified genes encoding proteins localized in the nucleus, 35.2% were located in mitochondria, and the rest were distributed in the cytosol, and among ribosomes and the cytoskeleton (Supplementary Fig. 1b). Twenty-five percent of the genes encoded nucleic acid-binding proteins, TFs and chromosome-associated proteins, while the rest were metabolic enzymes and plasma membrane proteins (Supplementary Fig. 1c). GO analysis of these genes showed that the enrichments were associated with fundamental cellular processes for cell survival (Fig. 1f, Supplementary Fig. 1e, f and Supplementary Data 1). Correspondingly, the majority of the genes involved in RNA transport, ribosomes and DNA replication were identified and included in this group (Fig. 1g).
To examine the correlation between the negative selection genes and pluripotency, we used the low-expression and non-essential genes as negative controls, the ribosome genes and core TFs in ESCs as the positive controls, and compared the target gene sgRNA abundance in the P.Sc_14d and P.Sc_0d samples. The results showed that the sgRNAs targeting the ribosome and core TFs genes were significantly decreased, whereas little change was observed in those targeting the low-expression and non-essential genes (Fig. 1h). When compared to the non-essential genes, the top100 and top1000 targeted genes ranked by MAGeCK had significantly higher expression levels in mESCs (Fig. 1i). Enrichment analysis also indicated that the negative selection genes were enriched in biological processes and pathways involved in ESC self-renewal (Supplementary Fig. 1d, g). The highest-ranking genes in the screen included the core factors Oct4, Nanog and Sox2, and several genes not previously implicated in ESC self-renewal maintenance, such as Zpr1, Ykt6 and Zbtb17 (Fig. 1j). These genes were all chosen as candidates for constructing the PGRN.
Generation of an extended self-renewal gene set by integrating different screening data
Comparing and integrating the data of other screens.
a Heatmap of Pearson correlation coefficients among all pairs of screens. b Venn diagram depicting the comparison of different screening studies with normalized data. The 457 overlapping genes were defined as the common set, whereas all the other genes were defined as the context-specific set (Supplementary Data 5). c Expression levels of the “core TFs”, “common”, “context-specific” and “non-essential genes” in mESCs. The data are represented as log10 (RPKM + 1). d Cluster dendrogram and module assignment for modules from WGCNA. Common and context-specific genes were clustered based on a topological overlap matrix (TOM). The branches correspond to modules of highly interconnected groups of genes. Colours in the horizontal bar represent the modules. Six modules with 3303 genes were detected. e Heatmap of the relationships between the modules and samples. Colours in the longitudinal bar represent the modules. The red cells correspond to positive correlation. The yellow cells correspond to negative correlation. The numbers in the cell indicate the correlation coefficient (upper) and p-value (below). Colour intensity is proportional to the correlation coefficient.
Since results from a single screen might be influenced by the specific CRISPR library used or by other factors, we then compared our list of negative selection genes to those identified in four previous screens performed under the same L/S culture conditions but with different mESC lines and CRISPR libraries. Unexpectedly, there was only 1 common gene between the five screens (Supplementary Fig. 2a). Considering that the different analysis methodologies used may influence the readout, we re-analysed the raw data of these screens with MAGeCK and identified genes that were significantly changed (p < 0.05) under negative selection. Pearson correlation analysis of these normalized data showed high concordance between the Tzelepis and Li screens and our screen. However, the screens by Zhao and Shohat pointed to a unique set of genes (Fig. 2a). In total, 457 (11.26%) genes were identified in all five screens (defined as the “common” gene set), while 3601 (88.74%) genes were identified in four or fewer screens (defined as the “context-specific” gene set) (Fig. 2b, Supplementary Fig. 2b). To test whether the context-specific genes were false positives caused by different screens, we assessed the functional relevance of these genes in self-renewal by examining their expression levels in E14 ESCs using RNA-seq data from GEO. Comparatively, despite being lower than the core TFs gene set, both the common and context-specific genes showed significantly higher expression levels than the non-essential genes (Fig. 2c). To exclude any bias caused by cell lines and culture conditions, we analysed the single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) data of IB10 ESCs and inner cell mass (ICM) cells from E4.5d embryos. Indeed, we observed high concordance of expression between the common genes, context-specific genes, core TFs and highly expressed genes in mESCs (Supplementary Fig. 2c, d).
To further clarify whether the high expression of the common and context-specific genes was specific to self-renewing mESC, weighed gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) was performed to analyse the gene expression profiles during mESC differentiation. As shown in Fig. 2d, six co-expression modules were constructed. Module-trait relationship analysis indicated that the blue module, which contains 86.35% of the common and 72.43% of the context-specific genes, had a high correlation with mESCs (Fig. 2e) and was significantly downregulated during either embryonic body (EB) formation or directional differentiation (Supplementary Fig. 2e), suggesting a strong functional relevance in mESC self-renewal.
Functional validation of the candidate genes in maintaining mESC self-renewal
Phenotypic validation of the candidate gene.
a The proliferation rates of WT, Cont (cells infected with control sgRNA) and target gene knockout cells. The indicated cells (1000 cells per cm2 in 12-well plates) were cultured in L/S for four days, and the cell numbers were counted. b Colony numbers of the indicated cells. Cells were seeded into 12-well plates at a density of 200 cells per well and grown for 6 days, and colony numbers were counted. c Morphology of colonies formed by the indicated cells. Scale bar, 200 μm. d Colonies were fixed and stained for AP and then scored as undifferentiated, mixed, or differentiated. Data in (a, b and d) are represented as the mean ± SD; n = 3.
To prove the veracity of the screening and integrative analysis, four genes (Ykt6, Polr3a, Adoa, Wdr75) in the common set and six genes (Serbp1, Zbtb17, Zpr1, Usp8, Pi4a and Bap1) in the context-specific set were selected to further validate their functions in mESC self-renewal. For each candidate, two sgRNAs were designed, and two mESC lines, R1 and CCE, were used to assess the self-renewal phenotype. Because both sgRNAs behaved similarly in two cell lines, data is presented for only one. The silencing level of each sgRNA was measured and confirmed by qRT-PCR (Supplementary Fig. 3). Compared to the wild-type (WT) and control (non-targeting sgRNA transduction) cells, all the target gene knockout (KO) cells, except for the Ykt6 KO cells, showed significantly reduced proliferation and colony forming capacity (Fig. 3a, b). Morphological observation and alkaline phosphatase (AP) staining assays showed that all 10 target gene KO cells displayed a differentiation-prone phenotype, i.e., flattened colony morphology, more scattered differentiation-like cells, and fewer AP-positive colonies (Fig. 3c, d). Collectively, these results suggest that both the common and context-specific genes are valid hits and required for the maintenance of self-renewal in mESCs.
Characterization of the integrated self-renewal related gene set
Enrichment analysis of the iSRGS.
a Enrichment map networks of pathway terms enriched by the iSRGS. The red nodes indicate pathways that were reported to participate in pluripotency maintenance. b GSEA showed the expression of fundamental pathway genes in ESCs relative to EBs differentiated for 14 days.
We next combined the core and context-specific genes and defined them as the integrated self-renewal related gene set (iSRGS) (Supplementary Data 6). The enrichment analysis showed that the iSRGS genes were mainly associated with fundamental cellular pathways such as DNA replication, proteasome degradation, oxidative phosphorylation, and the cell cycle (Fig. 4a, Supplementary Data 6). To ascertain the cellular pathways specific to mESCs, we performed gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) to analyses the expression profiles of genes in enriched pathways. The results showed that genes involved in the “oxidative phosphorylation”, “ubiquitin proteasome”, “mRNA processing” and “translations” pathways were highly expressed in mESCs and downregulated after differentiation (Fig. 4b). Since these pathways are common across cell types, these results suggest a possibly specific functional gene set of these cellular pathways in mESCs.
Signal pathways involved in the pluripotent state, such as the Wnt, JAK/Stat, TGFβ, p53 and FGF pathways, were also significantly enriched. Moreover, our results showed enrichment of pathways that were not reported to be involved in pluripotency regulation, such as the androgen receptor signalling pathway and Epo signalling pathway. In addition, pathways involved in the immune system, including T/B cell receptor signalling and IL-7/IL-6 signalling pathways, were also enriched (Fig. 4a).
Reconstruction of the PGRN in mESCs
Clustering the sub-classes in the PGRN and identifying their associated histone modification status.
a Classifications of sub-classes based on co-occupancy. Nine sub-classes were unsupervised hierarchical clusters based on Z-scores from 171 genes (total of 374 ChIP-seq data, see Methods section). All the sub-classes and their contents are shown on the right: PRC (12 genes, 29 experiments), CTCF (7 genes, 17 experiments), PCGF (5 genes, 5 experiments), PAF (6 genes, 6 experiments), TBX (20 genes, 21 experiments), CORE (32 genes, 41 experiments), MYC (43 genes, 47 experiments), P53 (single gene, 2 experiments) and REST (single gene, 3 experiments). b Histone modification status of the nine sub-classes. The average normalized read count of histone modification (y axis) within ±3 kb from the central peak of the sub-class (x axis) is plotted.
To re-construct the PGRN, we incorporated the transcriptional regulators in the iSRGS into the known regulatory networks, and clustered the regulatory units according to co-occupancy targets using ChIP-seq datasets that were available in public databases. As a result, we obtained nine sub-classes (Fig. 5a). In contrast to previous reports, the contents of the CORE, PRC and MYC sub-classes were all significantly increased, whereas regulators in the CTCF, REST and P53 classes were almost unchanged. In addition, three new classes, PCGF, PAF and TBX, were identified and named based on the representative factors in each class. The PCGF class consisted of PcG protein-related transcriptional repressors and methyltransferases. The PAF class included the PAF1 complex, H3K9me3 binding protein and mRNA methyltransferases. The TBX class included TFs of the POU and T-box family, chromatin looping proteins, nucleosome re-modelling proteins, histone-related proteins, RNA-related proteins and DNA methyltransferase (Fig. 5a, Supplementary Data 7).
The peak annotation analysis showed that the majority of binding peaks generated by factors in the MYC and PRC classes were more centred at the transcriptional start site (TSS), whereas the CORE, CTCF, P53 and REST classes generally localized further away from the TSS (Supplementary Fig. 4a). The peaks of the newly identified PAF class were located on both promoters and gene bodies, while the PCGF and TBX classes were localized mainly on introns and distal intergenic regions, which may suggest different regulatory modes (Supplementary Fig. 4a).
Since the target site of TFs is often related to specific chromatin marks, we then examined the association between factor co-occupancy and the histone modification signatures in each class. As shown in Fig. 5b, the CORE class binding regions were highly enriched with putative enhancer histone signature H3K4me1 and active histone signature H3K27ac. The factors in the PRC class harbored both repressive (H3K27me3) and active (H3K4me3) histone signatures on their binding sites, which indicated bivalent chromatin. Targets occupied by the MYC class showed high levels of the active histone signatures H3K4me3 and H3K27ac. The occupancies of the P53 and REST classes were associated with H3K27ac and H3K4me2, respectively. The PAF class targets were enriched with the active histone markers H3K4me3, H3K79me2 and H3K27ac, while PCGF and TBX occupied targets specifically associated with the repression histone markers H3K9me3 and K4K20me3 (Fig. 5b, Supplementary Fig. 4b). These results suggested that the CORE, P53, REST, PAF and MYC classes were mainly involved in the regulation of transcriptional activation. Among them, the genes in the CORE, P53 and REST classes generally bound distal regulatory elements, whereas those in the PAF and MYC classes preferentially bound to proximal regulatory elements. The PCGF and TBX classes typically correlated with transcriptional repression, by targeting distal silencers. The PRC class factors were enriched on poised genes by occupying proximal promoter regions with bivalent modifications.
Establishment of individual functional modules based on the newly defined transcriptional sub-classes
Gene composition and functional enrichment analysis of each module.
a The percentage of proximal and distal target genes defined by AdaEnsemble (see Method section) in each module. b Circos plot indicates the overlaps between module genes. The inner circle represents the gene lists of each module. Genes that hit multiple lists are coloured in dark orange, and genes unique to a list are shown in light orange. The purple curves inside link identical genes. c Venn diagram demonstrating the gene numbers and overlaps in transcriptionally active modules (left) and transcriptionally repressed modules (right). d GO analyses of genes in transcriptionally active modules (left) and transcriptionally repressed modules (right) (Supplementary Data 10). The top10 enrichment terms in each module are shown. The cell colour corresponds to –log2 (p-value).
In a sub-class, TFs and their co-occupied target genes compose a regulatory module, which represents a co-operative function of factors in the sub-class. Nearest gene linkage is the commonly used method for calling target genes. For each binding site identified by ChIP-seq, this approach usually assigns the nearest gene as its potential transcriptional target. Because some transcriptional sub-classes (CORE, CTCF and TBX) were preferentially located in intergenic regions >10 kb from the TSS of annotated genes (Supplementary Fig. 4a), we used adaptive sampling and an ensemble model (AdaEnsemble) to assign target genes. This approach integrated gene expression profiles with TF binding profiles and chromatin conformation data to predict high-confidence target genes regulated by both proximal and distal sites. Accordingly, putative proximal and distal target genes were identified for six major classes (CORE, PRC, MYC, PAF, PCGF and TBX). The other classes were not investigated further, as they consisted of non-specific chromatin looping regulators (CTCF) or just a single factor (REST and P53). As shown in Fig. 6a, while the PCGF module contained a similar ratio of proximal and distal targets, the MYC and PRC modules had more putative proximal target genes (59.5% and 67.6% respectively), and the CORE, PAF and TBX modules had more putative distal target genes (69.4%, 60.1% and 58.2% respectively). These results were in line with the distribution characteristics of binding sites of the individual sub-classes (Supplementary Fig. 4a).
Lists of the module gene sets were summarized in Supplementary Data 9. The PRC, PCGF and TBX modules showed clear separation, whereas the PAF, MYC and CORE modules shared many targets with each other (Fig. 6b, c). It was shown that there were 143 intersecting genes between the PAF and MYC modules and 106 intersecting genes between the PAF and CORE modules (Fig. 6c). As the CORE, PAF and MYC classes were mainly involved in the regulation of transcriptional activation, these results indicate that the promoters of active genes may always be bound by multiple factors, whereas repressed genes were regulated by fewer factors. To test whether the modules were functionally separable, we performed GO analysis and found that each module was primarily involved in different biological processes (Fig. 6d), suggesting that the modules are functionally independent.
Since the same CORE, MYC and PRC modules were defined in a previous report, we examined the similarity of two gene sets in each module. Comparatively, 454 CORE, 341 MYC and 516 PRC genes were identified in this study, whereas 111, 503 and 560 corresponding genes were identified by Kim et al. (hereafter referred to as CORE-Kim, MYC-Kim and PRC-Kim). Nonetheless, only 40, 62 and 233 genes overlapped between the respective modules (Supplementary Fig. 5a). The functional enrichment analysis also showed that different GO terms and pathways were identified in each respective module (Supplementary Fig. 5b–d). Some known pluripotency-associated pathways, such as the Wnt, PI3K/Akt and Hippo/Yap pathways, were specifically enriched in the current CORE module. In contrast, in the CORE-Kim module, more development-related pathways were enriched (Supplementary Fig. 5b). These results indicate remarkably different gene compositions and module functions between the previous and current studies.
For validating the newly defined PAF, PCGF and TBX3 modules, the ChIP assay have been performed using anti-Flag antibody in Flag-tagged Ctr9 (for PAF module), Tbx3 (for TBX module), Dpf2 (for TBX module) and Pcgf6 (for PCGF module) transfected mESCs. Then 11 target genes in different modules were chosen for qPCR analysis. The results were consistent with previous reports and showed that all the four transcriptional factors preferentially occupied the targets of their own modules (Supplementary Fig. 6), indicating the specific and reliable assignment of target genes for each module. Furthermore, functional analyses were performed to assess the impact of the newly constructed modules on mESCs self-renewal. The major transcriptional factor of each module (Ctr9, Pcgf6 and Tbx3) was knocked down individually by RNAi in a Nanog-GFP reporter ESC line (Supplementary Fig. 7a). Compared to the WT ESCs, Ctr9, Pcgf6 and Tbx3 KD cells displayed an impaired self-renewal phenotype characterized by slower proliferation rate, decreased proportion of AP-positive colonies and fewer Nanog-GFP positive cells (Supplementary Fig. 7b–d). These results indicated that PAF, PCGF and TBX3 modules were essential for mESC self-renewal. Moreover, we compared the RNA-seq data from mESCs in which the major component of CORE, MYC, PAF, PRC, PCGF and TBX3 module were silenced respectively. The GO analysis for DEGs in each gene KD cells showed that distinct prominent terms were enriched, despite all of them were involved in development regulation (Supplementary Fig. 7e), which further indicated that different module may have separate functions in mESC self-renewal maintenance.
Mapping the module activity patterns during mESC differentiation and embryo development
Module activity in mouse and human ESCs and early mouse embryos.
a GSEA showed the activities of the CORE, MYC, and PAF modules (upper) and the PRC, TBX, and PCGF modules (lower) in mESCs relative to 12-day EBs. b The boxplots show the gene expression of each module during directional differentiation of mESCs (endoderm_6 days, mesoderm_6 days, and neuroectoderm_6 days). Boxes show interquartile range, whiskers show fixed multiples of interquartile range and center line shows average gene expression values (log2) (see the Methods section). c Mapping the module activity patterns during the mouse embryo development from E2.5 to E7.5 based on spatiotemporal transcriptomic data. The colour of the plot denotes module activity from low (blue) to high (red). d The boxplots show the gene expression of each module during hESC (WA09) differentiation (hESCs, EB_5 days and EB_10 days).
Next, we tested the module activities in mESCs and differentiated cells. GSEA revealed that the genes in the CORE, MYC, and PAF modules were highly expressed in mESCs and downregulated after differentiation. In contrast, the genes in the PRC, TBX and PCGF modules were repressed in mESCs (Fig. 7a). We additionally tested the activity of each module during directed ectoderm, endoderm and mesoderm differentiation of mESCs. As expected, the CORE, MYC and PAF modules were highly active in mESCs and became repressed after differentiation, whereas the PRC, TBX and PCGF modules showed the opposite activity pattern (Fig. 7b).
We then mapped the spatiotemporal module activity patterns during mouse embryo development from E2.5 to E7.5 based on published scRNA-seq data. As shown in Fig. 7c, the CORE, MYC and PAF modules were highly active in pluripotent cells (MOR in E2.5, ICM in E3.5, epiblast in E4.5-E7.5) and repressed in differentiated cells (E and M in E5.5-E7.5), whereas the activities of the PCGF and TBX modules displayed almost opposite patterns. In comparison, the PRC module genes showed a similar expression pattern to those of the PCGF and TBX module genes except for the expression in the early stages of the pre-implantation embryo (MOR in E2.5 and ICM in E3.5) (Fig. 7c), suggesting a possible stage-specific function of this module in early and late embryo development. Together, these data reveal consistent correlations between the module activities and the pluripotent states of cells both in vitro and in vivo.
Module activity in hESCs
hESCs have a multilineage differentiation potential similar to that of mESCs. In addition, core mESC TFs, such as Oct4 and Tbx3, are active in hESCs and directly participate in pluripotency maintenance. Using the gene expression profiles of the hESCs and EB samples, we tested whether the module activity pattern was similar between mESCs and hESCs. The results showed that the activities of the six modules in hESCs were comparable to those in mESCs (Fig. 7d). To exclude cell line-specific effects, we performed analyses in both H1 and H9, and consistent results were obtained. These observations suggest conserved roles for these modules in human and mouse ESCs. Since hESCs are usually believed to be at the primed pluripotent state, these results are in accordance with the data obtained from in vivo development and indicate limited variation in the module activity pattern in different pluripotent states.
Module activity in human cancers
Association of module activity with tumour subtype and prognostic outcome in gliomas.
a The boxplots show the gene expression of each module in normal, LGG and GBM samples. Boxes show interquartile range, whiskers show fixed multiples of interquartile range and center line shows average gene expression values (log2). LGG, low-grade gliomas. GBM, glioblastoma multiform. b Enrichment patterns of modules in normal, LGG and GBM group samples. Numbers indicate the enrichment significance (-log2 (p-value)) of module genes within each sample group. Red (positive value) indicates enrichment for high-expression, and blue (negative value) indicates enrichment for low-expression. Colour intensity corresponds to the -log2 (p-value). c Kaplan–Meier analyses of the progression-free interval in patients. Patients with high module activities (50% cut-off) are labelled red, whereas patients showing low module activities (50% cut-off) are labelled blue. p values are calculated using the log-rank test.
According to previous reports, human tumours, especially poorly differentiated tumours display an ESC-like expression signature that may result from re-wiring of stem cell regulatory circuits. Therefore, ESC-like gene modules have been widely used in the assessment of cancer gene signatures. To test the activity of the re-defined ESC modules and establish relevance with human cancers, we first analysed the expression profile of 750 gliomas, which included 200 low-grade gliomas (LGG; astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas of grades 2 and 3) and 550 glioblastoma multiforme of grade 4 (GBM). As shown in Fig. 8a, we observed that the average activation levels of the CORE, MYC and PAF modules were higher in gliomas than in normal brain samples and showed a positive correlation with tumour grade. Conversely, the PRC, TBX and PCGF modules showed low activation in gliomas (Fig. 8a, Supplementary Fig. 8a). In GBMs, the same module activities as in ESCs were observed, in which the CORE, MYC and PAF modules were highly active, whereas the other modules were repressed. In LGG and normal tissues, however, these modules displayed an opposite activity pattern (Fig. 8b). These results indicate that the CORE, MYC and PAF modules may also be involved in the maintenance of the malignant phenotype of cancers.
To assess whether the activity of the modules is associated with tumour prognosis, we performed Kaplan-Meier analyses of the progression-free interval (PFI) for patients. As expected, tumours that displayed the strongest CORE, MYC or PAF module activity (top 50% of the samples) were associated with significantly worse survival outcomes than tumours with the weakest module activity. In contrast, tumours with increased activities of the TBX and PCGF modules tended to be associated with better survival outcomes, whereas the PRC module did not show significant correlations (Fig. 8c).
Next, we examined whether the module activity patterns of mESCs were present in other cancers. Analyses of the public gene expression profiling datasets of bladder, breast and non-small-cell lung cancer revealed that the high-grade tumours displayed high activities of the CORE, MYC and PAF modules with repressed expression of the the PRC, TBX and PCGF modules (Supplementary Fig. 8b–f). Together, these results suggest that ESC-specific signatures are shared by various human cancers. Nonetheless, we also observed inconsistent activity of the PRC module in lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC) and lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) (Supplementary Fig. 8b), indicating underlying impacts from tumour origin or cell heterogeneity.
The functional analysis of CORE, MYC and PAF modules in cancer cells.
a qRT-PCR analysis for the knocking down of indicated gene expression in A549 and U87 cells. The major transcriptional factors of each module, Ctr9 (PAF), Nanog (CORE) and Myc (MYC), were chosen for functional analysis. Cells were infected with lentivirus carrying control and shRNAs targeting the indicated genes respectively. All data is normalized to Gapdh and shown relative to WT ESCs (set at 1.0). b The indicated cells (2000 cells per cm2 in 6-well plates) were cultured for six days and cell numbers were counted. c The morphology of colonies formed by the indicated cell lines. Cells (1000 or 2000 cells in 48-well plates) were grown for 10 days. Scale bar, 50 μm. d Quantitative analysis of the colony formation assay in the indicated cell lines. Experiments were repeated three times and a representative result is shown. Data in (a–c) represent the mean ± SD; n = 3.
Furthermore, for assessing the function of CORE, MYC and PAF modules in cancer cells, Nanog (for CORE module), c-Myc (for MYC module) and Ctr9 (for PAF module) were knocked down in glioma cell line U87 respectively (Fig. 9a). As expected, all of the three gene KD cells displayed a decreased proliferation rate alongside limited colony formation capacity when compared to the control cells (Fig. 9b–d). Consistently, the same phenotypes were observed in the respective gene KD lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells (Fig. 9). These findings supported previous analysis results on clinical tumor samples (Fig. 8), demonstrating the importance of the CORE, MYC, and PAF modules in cancer progression.
Discussion
Previously, construction of the PGRN was based mainly on individual functional studies and physical interactions between genes. Recently, the application of high-throughput genetic technologies has expanded our knowledge of pluripotency regulators. In contrast to RNAi, CRISPR-Cas9 permits more convenient, efficient and precise gene editing. Thus, in this study, we first performed a CRISPR-Cas9-mediated functional genomics screen to systematically identify the essential genes for mESC self-renewal maintenance. Based on these results, we conducted a series of integrative analyses with another multiple-omics dataset to re-define the PGRN in mESCs.
Several studies have performed CRISPR-Cas9 functional genetic screens and obtained essential genes that are closely related to the maintenance of ESC pluripotency. However, the results between screenings show significant variances, which may be due to the different sgRNA libraries, cell models or analysis methodologies used in the different studies (Supplementary Table 1). While previous studies often focused on consensus target genes to rule out false-positive hits, some authentic pluripotency genes may be missed. In this research, comparative analysis of five CRISPR screens performed under similar culture conditions showed that the consensus genes (common) accounted for only 10% of the target genes, whereas 90% of the target genes were context-specific. However, through expression profile analysis and functional validation, both the common and context-specific genes were found to be necessary for the maintenance of ESC fitness. Therefore, data from different screens were integrated for further analysis to obtain more comprehensive functional genomics information. Consequently, three new transcriptional regulatory units (PCGF, PAF and TBX) were established that complemented the previously constructed sub-networks in mESCs.
The transcription program is controlled by TFs and their co-factors. The co-factors lack DNA binding capacities and are recruited by TFs to regulate gene expression. Generally, co-factors are necessary for the activation/repression of transcription but are not pluripotent stem cell specific. Therefore, previous studies have focused mainly on TFs when analysing transcriptional networks or sub-classes. However, functional genomics screens in ESCs have revealed that some co-factors, such asTIP60-p400, PAF1C, Mediator and Cohesin, are essential for pluripotency maintenance. On the other hand, the results of ChIP-seq and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses have indicated that the collaboration between TFs and co-factors is selective. For example, in ESCs, Myc preferentially constructs a regulatory complex with co-factor Tip60-Ep400, whereas Oct4 mainly co-operates with Mediator and Cohesin. In this study, through efficient functional screening and integrative analysis, we identified a broader range of co-factors indispensable for maintaining ESC fitness, including factors involved in nucleosome re-modelling (SWI/SNF family, NuRD complex), chromatin looping (RNF2, NCAPH2, MED12, TIP60-P400 complex) and histone modification (MSL complex, CXXC1, JARID1A, KDM1A, KDM4A). These findings allowed us to define the sub-classes of the PRGN more exactly.
Identifying the downstream target gene sets of regulators determines the quality of the constructed functional module. Previous studies often used the ad hoc approach to identify target genes, such as assigns TF binding sites to the nearest genes or to genes within arbitrary genomic distance thresholds (for example, 8 kb upstream and 2 kb downstream of a TSS). However, it becomes unreliable for the assignment of genes to distant regulatory elements. Since several of the sub-classes we defined in this study (CORE, PAF and TBX) showed preferential binding of distal sites, it is essential to identify distal target genes of sub-class factors. Moreover, as physical contact does not always imply functional regulation by TFs, it is necessary to distinguish functionally relevant target genes. In this study, we used AdaEnsemble to identify target genes, which predicted both proximal and distal target genes by combining ChIP-seq and Hi-C data. Furthermore, functionally relevant candidates were discriminated via expression profile analysis. Using these data and approaches, a new PRGN that comprises more detailed functional modules was defined.
The gene sets in the CORE, MYC and PRC modules were significantly different from those defined in previous studies. This discrepancy could be explained by several reasons. First, compared to previously defined clusters, the CORE, MYC and PRC classes were re-established with increased TFs and co-factors. The occupancy sites in each class were changed correspondingly. Second, different criteria were used to identify the co-occupancy target genes. For instance, in Kim’s research, the CORE module targets were identified as genes co-occupied by 7 of 9 factors, but in this study, the CORE targets were identified as genes co-occupied by 25 of 32 factors. Actually, upon the decrease in co-occupancy (e.g., 20 of 32 factors in CORE, 25 of 42 factors in MYC or 7 of 12 factors in PRC), the re-defined modules will cover nearly all the target genes of previously defined modules, but not vice versa. Third, different approaches were used to assign target genes. While previously defined modules focused only on the proximal targets, both proximal and distal target genes were included in our re-defined modules. Fourth, the issues of target gene expression levels in ESCs were addressed in the present study.
The PRC module mainly includes development associated genes and is generally repressed in self-renewing ESCs. However, increased PRC module activity was observed in E2.5-E4.5 pluripotent cells. Consistently, the same activity pattern was also shown for the PRC-Kim module. These results suggest an unexpected role of this functional module during early embryo development. We also noted that many target genes were shared by different modules, suggesting that these genes may be controlled by multiple mechanisms or that different modules may converge and co-operate to regulate specific biological processes in ESCs.
The activity of the newly defined PAF module is high in ESCs. Despite sharing some targets with the MYC and CORE modules, the PAF module was found to be specifically involved in non-sense mediated decay (NMD), regulation of translation and ribonucleoprotein complex assembly. Moreover, as previously mentioned, the Paf1 complex (the key factor of the PAF class) can promote the transcription of core factors (Oct4, Nanog and Sox2) by positively regulating enhancer activity. Meanwhile, the Paf1 complex can also influence the transcription of Myc target genes by interacting with Myc. These results suggest that, importantly, PAF may also function in connecting multiple modules in the regulatory network.
ESCs and cancer cells have been reported to have similar gene expression signatures. However, the precise nature of the gene expression regulation mode shared by ESCs and cancer cells still needs to be clarified. Kim et al found that only the MYC module accounts for the similarity of transcriptional programs between ESCs and cancer cells. Given that cancer cells and ESCs share many cellular and molecular features, several core pluripotency genes, such as Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and Nanog, are highly expressed in various types of human cancers, and some “NOS target gene sets” are enriched in high-grade tumours.It could be speculated that other gene modules may reflect stemness in cancer. In this study, using the newly defined modules as analytical tools, we observed that at least the CORE and PAF modules, as well as the MYC module were all shared by ESCs and cancer cells. Additionally, we observed different module activity patterns between different tumour sub-types. As it has become a consensus that cancer stem cells are responsible for the initiation and progression of tumours, it is urgent to discriminate and establish the stemness gene regulatory network of different types of tumours.
In conclusion, based on a functional genome-scale CRISPR screen and integrative analysis of multi-omics data, we re-defined the PGRN in ESCs. The newly constructed PGRN contains more comprehensive gene classifications and precise regulatory relationships. Whether and how these functional modules are coordinated to maintain the self-renewal of ESC needs to be further investigated. Nonetheless, these results will improve our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of pluripotency maintenance. Along with the advancement of cell tracing and bioinformatics technology, it is also anticipated that elaborate regulatory networks in other stem cells will be constructed.
Materials and methods
Plasmid construction
All sgRNA and shRNA targeting sequences (Supplementary Tables 2, 3) and primers (Supplementary Tables 4, 5) were designed and BLASTed to ensure specificity. The sgRNAs were cloned into the pLentiCRISPR v2 vector (Addgene plasmid # 52961). The lentiCas9-Blast was a gift from Feng Zhang (Addgene plasmid # 52962), and the Brie pooled library was a gift from David Root and John Doench (Addgene plasmid #73633). The shRNAs were cloned into the pLL3.7zeo vector.
The full-length ORFs of Tbx3, Ctr9, Pcgf6 and Dpf2 were PCR amplified from mouse ESC cDNA using KOD-Plus- (TOYOBO) and cloned into pGEM-T Easy (Promega). After DNA sequence verification, the ORFs were subcloned into pPyCAGIH. The 3×FLAG fragments were obtained via PCR, and subcloned in-frame into the expression vectors.
Lentiviral production
Viral particles were produced in 293FT cells by co-transfection with the lentiviral vector, pSPAX2 and pMD2G (4:3:1) by calcium phosphate transfection and concentrated by ultracentrifugation at 70,000 g for 2 h.
Cell lines and culture conditions
Mouse ESC line R1 (American Type Culture Collection) was cultured on plastic dishes precoated with 0.1% (w/v) gelatine with Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), supplemented with 5% ES cell-qualified foetal bovine serum (FBS), 15% KSR, 2 mM GlutaMAX, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 0.1 mM non-essential amino acids, 0.1 mM β-mercaptoethanol (all from Invitrogen) and 10 ng ml−1 LIF (Millipore). Cancer cell lines A549 and U87 (Cobioer) were cultured with Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), supplemented with 15% FBS. The cells were routinely propagated by trypsinization and re-plated every two to three days.
Generation of Cas9 expression cells
Stable Cas9-expressing R1 cells (Cas9/R1) were generated by infecting R1 cells with lentiviral vectors containing lentiCas9-Blast and selected with blasticidin (5 μg ml−1) for 7 days. The resistant colonies were pooled and expanded for further analysis.
Functional screen using the Brie library
As shown in Fig. 1a, Cas9/R1 cells were transfected with lentiviral vectors containing the Brie library at an MOI = 0.4. The cells were selected with puromycin (2 μg ml−1) for 2 days and then propagated in L/S culture supplemented with puromycin for 14 days. The cells were passaged every 2 days. At every passage, approximately 4.0 × 107 cells were seeded in new tissue culture plates (~400 cells per sgRNA). A total of 4.0 × 107 cells were retained on day 0 and day14 post-screening for sequencing.
DNA extraction, amplification, sequencing and statistical analysis
Genomic DNA (gDNA) was isolated using Blood & Cell Culture Mini Kits according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Qiagen). The extracted DNA and plasmid library were amplified as previously described. For each DNA sample from cells, we performed 30 separate 100 μl reactions with 7 μg genomic DNA in each reaction using KOD FX DNA Polymerase (TOYOBO) and then combined the resulting amplicons. Primer sequences to amplify the sgRNAs were Crispr seqF: 5’- TTGTGGAAAGGACGAAACACCG-3’ and Crispr seqR: 5’- TCTACTATTCTTTCCCCTGCACTGT-3’. The PCR products were purified using a gel extraction kit (Omega). Samples were sequenced on a NextSeq machine (Illumina) at BIOZERON Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Reads were counted by first locating the CACCG sequence that appears in the vector 5’ in all gRNA inserts. The next 20 bases are the gRNA insert, which were then mapped to a reference file of all possible gRNAs present in the library using Bowtie 2.3.4.1. Positive and negative selection genes were analyzed using MAGeCK software with a threshold of p value < 0.05.
Chromosome localization
Chromosome localizations of genes of interest were retrived from the NCBI database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/), in which the number of genes at different chromosome regions is available. The R package (RIdeogram) was used to display this information.
Sub-cellular localization
Localizations of proteins into cellular compartments were retrieved from the GO cellular component data source of the g:Profiler website (http://biit.cs.ut.ee/gprofiler/gost). The cellular components were divided into 9 compartments according to the sub-cellular localization: nucleus, mitochondrin, golgi, cytosol, ribosome, vesicle, peroxisome, endoplasmic reticulum. If one gene was enriched in multiple cellular components, we assigned it to all the associated compartments equally.
Functional enrichment analysis
Functional categorization of protein
Functional categorization of the negative selection genes was performed using the PANTHER website (http://www.pantherdb.org/).
Gene Ontology
Molecular function (MF), cellular component (CC) and biological process (BP) analyses were performed by using the g:Profiler website. GO terms significant at an FDR-corrected p value <0.05 were summarized (Supplementary Data 1), and the top 10 terms are shown. The detailed BP enrichment results are presented as a network diagram using the Cytoscape app ‘Enrichment map’.
Signalling pathways
Curated pathways categories of the Gene Set Knowledgebase (GSKB, https://bioconductor.org/packages/gskb/) were identified by using GSEA software.
Comparing the screening results with previously published datasets
The raw data from four screening studies were obtained from the supplemental of the references (Supplementary Data 2). To exclude any bias caused by different analysis methodologies, we re-analysed the raw data from the shohat, Tzelepis and Zhao studies with MAGeCK. For Li’s research, we used the result (GFPplus-d15_vs_Plasmid. txt) calculated from MAGeCK provided by the author directly. The normalized results are summarized in Supplementary Data 3. Pearson correlation analysis was performed based on the normalized log2-fold change (LFC) of genes in each screening result.
WGCNA
WGCNA was performed to construct a gene co-expression network across different samples, including ESCs, EB differentiation and three germ layer directional differentiations. First, to calculate the adjacency matrix, weighted co-expression relationships were evaluated by using paired Pearson correlations. Second, we converted the adjacency matrix into a topological overlap matrix (TOM). Then, genes with high expression correlations were clustered into modules based on TOM. Finally, a heatmap was drawn to show the correlation between different co-expression modules and samples. The data used for WGCNA were RPKM standardized format and all downloaded from public database. Among them, the data describing the gene expression of EB differentiation (GSE120224) was downloaded from the GEO database. The RNA-seq data of three germ layer directional differentiation samples (E-MTAB-4904) was downloaded from the BioStudies database (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biostudies/). The RPKM processed expression data of mESCs (GSE53387) were from the supplemental data of reference.
Cell proliferation and colony formation assay
For the proliferation assay, the mESC cells were plated at a density of 1000 cells per cm2 in gelatine-coated 12-well plates and cultured for 4 days, the cancer cells were plated at a density of 2000 cells per cm2 in 6-well plates and cultured for 6 days. Viable cells were determined by Trypan blue exclusion and counted with an automated cell counter (Countstar BioTech).
For the colony formation assay, ESCs were plated at clonal density (50 cells per cm2) and cultured for 6 days. Colonies were stained with a BCIP/NBT AP detection kit (Beyotime) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and scored in three categories: undifferentiated, mixed (partially differentiated) and differentiated. Cancer cells were plated at a density of 1000 or 2000 cells per well in 48-well plates and cultured for 10 days.
Enrichment analysis of the iSRGS
The enrichment analysis of the iSRGS was performed using GSEA. GSEA has a robust ability to find more consistent results from independent datasets obtained with different platforms than from a single dataset. We further performed GSEA on the five screen results individually. Enrichment pathways that met any of the requirements were selected: (1) the enrichment terms in the iSRGS with a q-value <0.05; (2) the enrichment terms in the iSRGS with a q-value ≥0.05 but were enriched in more than 2 out of the 5 screen results with q-value <0.2; and (3) the enrichment terms in the iSRGS with a q-value ≥0.05 but were enriched in more than 3 out of the 5 screen results with a q-value <0.5 (Supplementary Data 6). The detailed enrichment results are presented as a network diagram using the Cytoscape app ‘Enrichment map’ (Fig. 4A).
Classifications of the sub-classes in the PGRN based on co-occupancy
ChIP-seq data download and processing
A total of 374 ChIP-seq datasets (Supplementary Data 7) for 145 transcriptional regulators (59 genes in the known network and 86 newly identified genes in iSRGS) were downloaded from the public database. All the data were from mESCs cultured under L/S conditions. ChIP-seq data were downloaded from the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database. FASTQ files were extracted from SRA files by SRA-Toolkit 2.9.2 (https://hpc.nih.gov/apps/sratoolkit.html). FASTQ quality was checked by FastQC (https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/), and low-quality bases of FASTQ were removed by Trim_Galore 1.18 (https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/trim_galore/). FASTQ files were aligned onto the mouse genome (mm10) using Bowtie 2.3.4.1. Binding sites of DNA-binding proteins and histone marks were both identified by model-based analysis of ChIP-seq peak caller (MACS) 2.1.4. For each peak calling, if one experiment had control ChIP-seq data, the control data were used to remove the background noise; if the experiment was without control data, we chose GSM307154 as universal control data. For technical replicates in the same laboratory, only intersection regions of peaks from all replicates were used based on the intersect command in BEDTools software.
Gene co-occupancy
The degree of co-occupancy between two genes was calculated by the Z-score value as previously described. The Z-score matrix is presented as a heatmap. A total of 126 genes (with 171 ChIP-seq datasets) were clustered into nine sub-classes (Fig. 5a), whereas the other 19 genes were excluded because of low co-occupancy degrees. Of note, the P53 and REST classes were included in the nine classes as previously reported despite low co-occupancy degrees. The genomic annotation and distance distribution of each peak file were visualized by using the ChIPseeker R package (Supplementary Fig. 3a).
Acquisition of co-occupancy binding sites
To acquire high-degree co-occupancy binding sites (HDBS), we first merged all the binding sites of the genes in one sub-class using the merge command in BEDTools software. Then the intersection command was used to calculate the number of genes occupied at each site. The sites with the top co-occupancy degree were selected. In total, the CORE class targets were identified as sites co-occupied by 25 of 32 factors, the MYC class targets were identified as sites co-occupied by 36 of 43 factors, the PRC class targets were identified as sites co-occupied by 11 of 12 factors, the CTCF class targets were identified as sites co-occupied by 7 of 7 factors, the PCGF class targets were identified as sites co-occupied by 4 of 5 factors, the PAF class targets were identified as sites co-occupied by 5 of 6 factors, the TBX class targets were identified as sites co-occupied by 12 of 20 factors, the P53 class targets were identified as sites co-occupied by 1 of 1 factor, the REST class targets were identified as sites co-occupied by 1 of 1 factor(Supplementary Data 8).
Identification of the histone modification status
The RPGC of ten histone marks was normalized by using bamCoverage tools in deepTools software (3.1.3). The chromatin modification degrees on each co-occupancy binding site were calculated using computeMatrix tools in deepTools software. Visualization was realized by using plotHeatmap tools in deepTools software.
Defining the target genes of the sub-class
Predicting putative target genes
The proximal target genes (TSS ± 5 kb) were obtained by using the ChIPseeker R package’s seq2gene function. The chromatin interactions between distal regulatory elements (REs) and promoters were determined based on a published Capture Hi-C (CHi-C) dataset in ESCs. Genes with distal REs occupied by the sub-class regulators were considered putative distal target genes. The proximal and distal target genes were combined as putative target genes of the sub-class.
Acquisition of the final target genes
AdaSampling was used to optimize the putative target genes as previously reported. To reduce the false-positive rate (FPR), we set the AdaSampling prediction threshold to 1. Histone modifications were quantified for each gene by calculating the RPKM in 5 kb region around the TSS. Finally, the sub-class target genes with similar transcriptional patterns and epigenomic features were discriminated based on the expression profiles (time-course RNA-seq data of EB formation) and epigenomic data (ChIP-seq data of 10 histone markers) (Supplementary Data 9).
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
ChIP was performed using the ChIP Assay Kit (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. DNA fragments with an average size of 500 bp were immunoprecipitated using anti-Flag (Beyotime) monoclonal antibodies. Quantitative PCR analyses were performed using the Eco real-time PCR System (Roche) and SYBR green master mix (Roche). All the ChIP-qPCR primers are listed in Supplementary Supplementary Table 5.
RNA-seq
Total RNA was extracted using Trizol Reagent according to the manufacturer’s manual. RNA samples were sent to Sangon Biotech Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China) for mRNA sequencing on Illumina Hiseq platform (Illumina) with 6 Gbps.
Module expression activity analysis
RNA-seq datasets were collected and processed as follows. The RNA-seq data of hESCs (GSE143371) were downloaded from GEO. The RNA-seq data of lung cancer and gliomas as well as the clinical survival data of gliomas were downloaded from the Xena dataset (https://xenabrowser.net/datapages/). SRA file download, FASTQ extraction and quality control processes of RNA-seq data were the same as those of ChIP-seq data, as described before. FASTQ files were aligned to the mouse genome mm10 using HISAT2 2.1.0. We used featureCount software to calculate gene expression from aligned bam files. First, gene expression levels were calculated as counts of the exon model per million mapped reads (CPM) to remove interference from sequence depth. Second, the mRNA expression of a gene was standardized across all the samples:where for each gene  is the expression level of mRNA at sample  and  is the average expression of each gene  across all the samples. After standardization, the centralized expression of genes  at sample  was calculated as the centralized and standardized expression values at each sample. Positive values represent up-mean expression and vice versa.
To quantify the average expression activity of the module, we first extracted the local data  from the total data , where the gene belongs to the specified module, and sample  belongs to the specified tumour pathological sub-type. Next, we summed the local data  and divided this by summation of all the genes  in all the samples , where  and  are the total number of genes  and total number of samples , respectively. The data are represented by a bar graph to show the average expression activity of the module.
Mapping the module activity patterns in early embryos
To analyze the module activities in E2.5-E7.5 mouse embryos, we downloaded the single cell RNA-seq data from public database (E2.5-E4.5: E-MTAB-2958 and E-MTAB-2959; E5.5-E7.5: GSE120963), the activity score of each module in each sample was computed using AUCell (https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/AUCell/inst/doc/.html) as previously described. Finally, corn plots were generated based on the activity score of each module.
Spatial coordinates in the corn plot are as follows: anterior (A); posterior (P); left lateral (L); right lateral (R); anterior left lateral (L1); anterior right lateral (R1); posterior left lateral (L2); posterior right lateral (R2); divided epiblast (Epi1 and Epi2); whole mesoderm (M); anterior mesoderm (MA); posterior mesoderm (MP); divided endoderm (En1 and En2); anterior endoderm (EA) and posterior endoderm (EP).
Survival analysis
All the clinical survival data of cancer were downloaded from the public databases. The patient samples of each cancer were divided into the top 50% and bottom 50% groups according to the module activities. Then, the survival R package was used to do the Kaplan–Meier analyses of the progression-free interval in patients. p values are calculated using the log-rank test.
Analysis of gene set enrichment pattern
The gene set enrichment patterns were analysed as previously reported. Briefly, for each sample, we first scored the genes whose expression was at least 2-fold over or under the average expression level and defined them as over- or under-expressed gene sets. Next, we assessed the fraction of over- and under-expressed genes in each sample belonging to a particular module and calculated the p value based on hypergeometric distribution. We used a threshold of p < 0.05 for significant enrichment. If both the over- and under-expressed genes were significantly enriched, we chose the gene set with the smaller p value and displayed it in the heatmap. Third, patient samples were clustered into different groups by clinical classification criteria. We assessed the fraction of samples enriched in the over- or under-expressed gene sets belonging to a particular group and calculated the p value based on hypergeometric distribution. The normalized expression data files and sample annotations were found at http://jura.wi.mit.edu/bioc/benporath/.
Statistics and reproducibility
The statistical analyses of the data are noted in the respective section describing the methods details. The figure legends give full information about the number of independent biological replicates (n) analyzed.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Supplementary information
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
These authors contributed equally: Yan Ruan, Jiaqi Wang, Meng Yu.
Supplementary information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s42003-023-04700-w.
Author contributions
R.J., Y.R., and J.Q.W. designed the project. J.Q.W., M.Y., F.S.W., and J.J.W. performed the bioinformatics analysis. Y.P.T., J.L.Z., R.Y., L.L.L., Y.D.C., Y.X.X., C.Z., Y.Y., and M.Y. performed the experiments. Y.R. and R.J. wrote the manuscript. R.J. conceived and supervised the study. G.X.C., J.L.W., W.W., and Y.H. contributed to the analysis and interpretation of data.
Peer review
Peer review information
Communications Biology thanks the anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Primary Handling Editors: Simona Chera and Eve Rogers. Peer reviewer reports are available.
Data availability
The raw data of the four screening studies, Shohat (2019), Tzelepis (2016), Li (2018), and Zhao (2017), were downloaded from the supplementary material of these references. RNA-seq data were downloaded from GEO with accession number GSE120224 for EB differentiation of mESC (0d versus EB12d) (Fig. 2e; Fig. 7a); GSE143371 for EB differentiation of hESC (0d, 5d,10d) (Fig. 7d); and GSE44067 (Fig. 1i; Fig. 2c) and GSE53387 (Fig. 2e) for mESCs cultured in LIF/serum. RNA-seq data were downloaded from EMBL-EBI with accession number E-MTAB-4904 for three germ layer directional differentiation of mESCs (Fig. 2e; Fig. 7b) and E-MTAB-2958 and E-MTAB-2959 for E2.5-E4.5 mouse embryos (Fig. 7c). scRNA-seq data were downloaded from GEO with accession number GSE65525 for mESCs cultured with LIF/serum (Supplementary Figure 2d); GSE116165 for mouse E4.5 embryos (Supplementary Figure 2c) and GSE120963 for mouse embryo spatiotemporal scRNA-seq (E5.5-E7.5) (Fig. 7c). Microarray data were downloaded from GEO with accession number GSE3749 for mESC EB differentiation (Fig. 4b), GSE4189 for mNanog KD mESCs, and GSE27881 for mMax KD mESCs. Microarray data of mSuz12 KD mESCs was downloaded from the supplementary material of reference (Supplementary Figure 7e). mESC histone ChIP-seq data were downloaded from GEO with accession number GSE11724 for H3K79me2; GSE12241 for H4K20me3; GSE24164 for H3K27ac; GSE25532 for H3K27me3; GSE27827 for H3K4me2; GSE29218 for H3K4me3; GSE29413 for H3K9me3; GSE30203 for H3K4me1; GSE31284 for H3K9ac; and GSE41589 for H3K36me3. RNA-seq data for lung cancer and gliomas as well as the clinical survival data of gliomas were downloaded from the Xena dataset (https://xenabrowser.net/datapages) (Fig. 8a–c; Supplementary Figure 5a-b). The breast and bladder normalized expression data files as well as sample annotations were found at http://jura.wi.mit.edu/bioc/benporath/ (Supplementary Figure 5c–f). The ChIP-seq data for transcriptional regulators were downloaded and are listed in Supplementary Data 7. RNA-seq data for Tbx3 KD, Ctr9 KD and Pcgf6 KD mESCs have been deposited in the GEO under the accession numbers GSE219206.
Code availability
The scripts used for data analysis were uploaded to github (https://github.com/Jack123-Wang/A-multi-omicsRuan).
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
